Tackling the Crowdsourced Shared-Trip Delivery Problem at Scale
with a Novel Decomposition Heuristic
Dingtong Yang a, b
E-mail: dingtony@uci.edu
ORCiD: 0000-0001-7377-4531
Michael F. Hyland a, b, Corresponding Author
Email: hylandm@uci.edu
Phone: (949) 824-5084
ORCiD: 0000-0001-8394-8064
Institute of Transportation Studies, 4000 Anteater Instruction and Research Bldg. (AIRB)
Irvine, CA 92697-3600
R. Jayakrishnan a, b
E-mail: rjayakri@uci.edu

a
b

University of California-Irvine, Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of California-Irvine, Institute of Transportation Studies

Abstract
This paper presents a set-partitioning formulation and a novel decomposition heuristic (D-H) solution
algorithm to solve large-scale instances of the urban crowdsourced shared-trip delivery (CSD) problem.
The CSD problem involves dedicated vehicles (DVs) and shared personal vehicles (SPVs) fulfilling
delivery orders, wherein the SPVs have their own trip origins and destinations. The D-H begins by assigning
as many package delivery orders (PDOs) to SPVs as possible, where the D-H enumerates the set of routes
each SPV can feasibly traverse and then solves a PDO-SPV-route assignment problem. For PDO-DV
assignment and DV routing, the D-H solves a multi-vehicle routing problem with time-window, tour
duration, and capacity constraints using an insertion heuristic. Finally, the D-H seeks potential solution
improvements by switching PDOs between SPV and DV routes through a simulated annealing (SA)inspired procedure. The D-H outperforms a commercial solver in terms of computational efficiency while
obtaining near-optimal solutions for small problem instances. The SA-inspired switching procedure
outperforms a large neighborhood search algorithm regarding run time, and the two are comparable
regarding solution quality. Finally, the paper uses the D-H to analyze the impact of several relevant factors
on city-scale CSD system performance, namely the number of participating SPVs and the maximum
willingness to detour of SPVs. Consistent with the existing literature, we find that CSD can substantially
reduce delivery costs. However, we find that CSD can increase vehicle miles traveled. Our findings provide
meaningful insights for logistics practitioners, while the algorithms illustrate promise for large real-world
systems.

Keywords: Crowd-Shipping; Sharing Economy; Open Vehicle Routing Problem; Heterogenous Vehicles;
Last-Mile Delivery; Simulated Annealing

2

1

Introduction

To better accommodate the increasing demand for urban parcel delivery, several logistics companies now
offer crowdsourced delivery (CD) services. In CD services, the logistics provider pays non-employee (also
known as “gig” or “CD”) drivers—usually in addition to fully employed drivers—to deliver packages (Rai
et al., 2017). Typically, CD drivers use a vehicle that they own or lease. In contrast, drivers employed by
logistics providers typically use a vehicle owned by the logistics provider dedicated to goods delivery.
Private firms and academic researchers are testing and evaluating various CD methods, respectively.
Retailing, transportation, and logistics companies like Walmart Spark Driver, Amazon Flex, and Uber Eats
have launched such programs. Alnaggar et al. (2021) provide a detailed summary of current CD programs.
Researchers have also proposed various ways to formulate and solve logistics problems related to CD.
Section 2 provides a detailed review of the current literature related to CD, also known as crowd-shipping.
In this paper, we focus on a specific type of CD service where package delivery orders (PDOs) “share rides”
with CD drivers who have their own trips to complete. This problem is similar to several other CD logistical
problems in the literature, including the “vehicle routing problem with occasional drivers (VRPOD)” in
Archetti et al. (2016), the “crowdsourced delivery with ad hoc drivers” in Arslan et al. (2019), and the
“crowdsourced delivery with in-store customers” in Dayarian and Savelsbergh (2020). The CD service we
define is an extension of the service type in Dayarian and Savelsbergh (2020)—in both studies, potential
CD drivers have their own trip origin and destination and can serve PDOs en-route between these two
locations. However, unlike Dayarian and Savelsbergh (2020), we permit CD driver origins to include
locations other than retail stores. Several other studies also consider CD drivers with flexible trip origins
(Le et al., 2021; Mousavi et al., 2022; Nieto-Isaza et al., 2022). Not limiting the CD driver pool to just instore customers should increase the market for CD drivers while keeping the core idea behind CD: utilizing
space inside personal vehicles and taking advantage of the enormous number of daily personal vehicle trips.
We name the specific problem we address, the crowdsourced shared-trip delivery (CSD) problem.
There are several names for CD drivers in the literature, including “occasional drivers” in Archetti et al.
(2016, 2021) and Mohri et al. (2023) and “committed drivers” in Savelsbergh and Ulmer (2022) and Ulmer
and Savelsbergh (2020). To further differentiate our CD drivers, whose primary purpose is not serving
PDOs, from those CD or gig drivers who provide delivery services for a fixed period, we name our drivers
crowdsourced shared-trip delivery (CSD) drivers. Moreover, we refer to their vehicles as shared personal
vehicles (SPVs).
Figure 1 displays a diagram of the CSD system. A central manager is responsible for delivering PDOs from
the distribution center to locations throughout the service area. The packages in PDOs are small- to mediumsized parcels (without hazardous material) that can easily fit inside the trunk or the seats of ordinary sedans.
The PDOs each have a latest delivery time, distributed across the day, representing commitments made by
the logistic provider or retail company to consumers. In the proposed system, SPVs travel to the distribution
center, pick up PDOs, drop off the PDOs, and travel to their own destinations.
The SPV drivers are compensated based on the number of PDOs they deliver and their total detour distance.
The central manager assigns PDOs to drivers. To make assignment decisions and compensate drivers for
their detour distance, drivers must share their personal trip origin and destination with the platform. The
central manager also has a fleet of trucks/vans (named “dedicated vehicles” and abbreviated as DVs)
available to deliver parcels. The objective of the central manager is to minimize total delivery costs. The
3

decision levers available to the central manager include the partitioning of PDOs between the SPVs and the
DV fleet, the assignment of PDOs to specific SPVs and DVs, and the routing of each DV and SPV.

Figure 1: Crowdsourced shared-trip delivery (CSD) system
Several research groups also address the CSD problem (Archetti et al., 2016; Dahle et al., 2019; Kafle et
al., 2017; Macrina et al., 2017, 2020). These studies find that sufficient driver participation is critical to the
success of CD services. However, the problem instances in these prior studies only include 60-100 potential
CSD drivers.
The overarching goal of this study is to develop a modeling approach and solution method to solve the CSD
problem at scale. Additionally, we aim to provide insights into the potential benefits of CSD at scale.
Specifically, we aim to address the CSD problem for cases with over 1000 CSD drivers. We also aim to
generalize the existing CSD problem wherein only in-store customers can serve as CSD drivers, by allowing
other drivers with their own trip origin and destination to serve as potential CSD drivers.
We propose a novel decomposition heuristic (D-H) to solve large-scale instances. The D-H handles the
assignment of PDOs to SPVs and DVs separately but attempts to improve the solution by switching PDOs
between SPVs and DVs. The switching procedure improves the solution quality iteratively through a
simulated annealing (SA)-inspired procedure.
This paper makes several contributions to the academic literature and the practice of CD logistics.
1. (As stated before, handling a large number of SPVs (in the range of 1000) and efficiently tackling
the CSD problem at scale are the major gaps in the literature. This study bridges the gap by
proposing a D-H algorithm to solve large instances of the vehicle-PDO matching and routing
problem for a mixed fleet of DVs and SPVs.
2. The second contribution lies in the design of the D-H algorithm. The algorithm provides a novel
approach to handle the CSD problem. We first decompose the problem by vehicle type, where the
two vehicle types are SPV and DV. We optimally assign PDOs to SPVs first; then, we assign the
remaining PDOs to DVs using a standard insertion-based heuristic. We then iteratively improve
the solution by swapping PDOs between SPVs and DVs—the next contribution relates to this
swapping procedure. The D-H algorithm leverages an essential feature of SPVs—each SPV has its
4

own destination (and latest arrival time), which heavily constrains the possible routes for each SPV.
As such, we can enumerate all candidate routes for each SPV. Then, when assigning PDOs to SPVs,
we assign PDOs to specific SPV routes. The computational experiments illustrate that the proposed
D-H is much faster and more scalable than an exact solution approach. For small problem instances,
the optimality gap between the D-H and the exact solution is quite small (i.e., a 0.5-2.7% optimality
gap).
3. The third contribution lies in the D-H algorithm's swapping procedure. Instead of applying a
standard or conventional heuristic or meta-heuristic for a VRP, we tailor a swapping procedure that
combines “local search” with “relatively larger neighborhood search” in an SA-inspired procedure.
The proposed swapping procedure effectively improves the solution quality without requiring
significant computational effort. We compare our swapping procedure with a large neighborhood
search (LNS) heuristic and find that our proposed swapping procedure is competitive with the LNS
algorithm regarding solution quality, but the swapping procedure is substantially faster than the
LNS algorithm.
4. The study also contributes to industrial practice by analyzing the impact of critical CSD system
design factors on key logistics performance metrics. For example, we analyze the impact of (i)
additional SPVs on total delivery costs, (ii) CD driver willingness to detour on total vehicle miles
and carbon emissions, and (iii) CD drivers rejecting PDOs on total delivery costs.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature relevant to CD. Section
3 formulates the underlying problem using a conventional VRP-based model and a set partitioning model.
Section 4 describes the novel D-H solution algorithm. Section 5 introduces a real-world numerical case
study in Irvine, CA, USA. Section 6 includes the computational results. Finally, Section 7 summarizes
major findings, concludes the paper, and discusses future research.

2

Literature Review

This section reviews literature relevant to the proposed CSD service defined in Section 1. Section 2.1
provides general background information on CD for the last-mile logistics problem. Section 2.2 focuses on
studies that model and solve CD operational problems.

2.1

Crowdsourced Last-mile Delivery

We distinguish between two types of studies related to CD. The first type includes empirical studies that
rely on collecting behavioral data, conducting surveys, or performing experiments. The studies in this
category attempt to answer behavioral questions related to CD. Examples include understanding customer
acceptance of CD (Punel et al., 2018; Punel and Stathopoulos, 2017) and the willingness of drivers to
participate in CD (Castillo et al., 2022; Ermagun et al., 2020; Ermagun and Stathopoulos, 2018; Miller et
al., 2017). These studies provide qualitative and quantitative insights into the behavioral aspects of CD.
These behavioral insights also provide value to the second type of CD study.
The second type of CD studies uses mathematical models (e.g., analytical models, optimization models,
simulations) to optimize or analyze specific CD services. Recent studies in this area focus on (i) workforce
planning, acquisition, and scheduling, (ii) pricing and compensation schemes, (iii) delivery task assignment
and vehicle routing, and (iv) integration of CD with other services. We provide more details on each of
these four areas below.

5

Studies related to workforce planning focus on the supply of CD workers. Some studies focus on static
capacity planning with a mix of dedicated and occasional drivers (Dai and Liu, 2020; Tao et al., 2021).
Others focus on planning with a mix of (i) contract drivers who commit to a specific period and (ii)
occasional drivers (Yildiz and Savelsbergh, 2019). Apart from the problem of static capacity planning,
problems of dynamic workforce acquisition and scheduling are also studied under this category (Behrendt
et al., 2023; Lei et al., 2020; M. Ulmer and Savelsbergh, 2020). Depending on the communication method
between CD drivers and the platform, the supply workforce acquisition is sometimes achieved through task
menu selection by drivers (Ausseil et al., 2022).
Studies related to compensation schemes for CD drivers focus on pricing mechanisms to attract drivers
while minimizing driver acquisition costs. Qi et al. (2018) apply an analytical approach to determine the
minimum compensation for driver acquisition. M. Ulmer (2020) studies the problem of dynamic pricing in
the same-day delivery problem. Barbosa et al. (2023) apply a data-driven approach to consider the scenarios
where drivers may reject PDO matches due to the low compensation offered. Notably, workforce planning
is directly related to driver compensation since pricing and compensation schemes impact drivers’
willingness to participate.
Most CD studies, including the current study, focus on delivery task assignment and vehicle routing
(Savelsbergh and Ulmer, 2022). Section 2.2 reviews this area in detail.
In the last area of studies, prior research integrates CD service with other services. One extension of the
fixed depot CD service problem involves deploying flexible or mini depots in the service design. The CD
problem with flexible depots permits the transshipment of parcels between CD drivers. Mousavi et al. (2022)
assume stochastic demand for PDOs and integrate the last-mile CD with mobile depots. Nieto-Isaza et al.
(2022) deploy multiple mini-depots to reduce transportation costs while minimizing the depot deployment
cost. Like mini depots, researchers also integrate parcel lockers/transshipment points with CD service for
last-mile delivery. Parcel lockers are different from mini depots as the former permit customers to pick up
PDOs at the lockers (Ghaderi et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022). Another application of CD service is the
integration with item-sharing (Behrend and Meisel, 2018). Finally, designs of the last-mile CD service also
involve the participation of neighbors (Akeb et al., 2018) or friends (Devari et al., 2017), in which drivers
can deliver parcels to neighbors when the final PDO recipients are not at home.

2.2

Delivery Task Assignment and Vehicle Routing in Crowdsourced Delivery

Delivery task assignment and vehicle routing are fundamental components of CD services. As such, most
studies that aim to quantitatively analyze the supply-side of CD service rely directly or indirectly on models
and algorithms for delivery task assignment and routing decisions. In this section, we distinguish between
dynamic and static as well as stochastic and deterministic delivery task assignment and routing decision
problems.
Dynamic CD problems involve making sequential decisions for task assignment and routing, where
information about future delivery requests is incomplete. Arslan et al. (2019) propose a seminal model for
dynamic CD. In addition to the case of a single store as the depot, they also consider in-store customers’
willingness to travel to another depot for pickup and delivery. To solve the problem, they propose a rolling
horizon approach that employs a matching problem solution technique. Dayarian and Savelsbergh (2020)
model the dynamic CD problem, assuming a maximum of one task per SPV. They propose and compare
decision strategies, namely, myopic assignment and sample scenario planning. Archetti et al. (2021) model
6

the dynamic problem where CD drivers can simultaneously serve multiple PDOs. They assume
stochasticity associated with PDOs, but they assume complete information on CD drivers, including a prespecified working time window. Fatehi and Wagner (2022) apply an analytical approach to dynamically
match tasks to either CD drivers or 3PL logistic providers (dedicated drivers), but they do not try to optimize
vehicle routes.
Other than problems that consider task assignment and routing, Zehtabian et al. (2022) propose a dynamic
model to estimate the arrival time of pickup and delivery of CD drivers and solve the problem with a lookahead policy. To handle larger-scale problems, Simoni and Winkenbach (2023) propose a dynamic task
assignment with PDO batching to improve assignment efficiency.
Stochastic problem settings include uncertainty from the supply side (e.g., stochastic driver supply, driver
information, driver rejection), the demand side (e.g., uncertain delivery requests, uncertain customer
availability/presence), or both. Most stochastic problems deal with supply-side uncertainty (Pugliese et al.,
2023; Feng et al., 2021; Gdowska et al., 2018; Torres et al., 2022a, 2022b). Gdowska et al. (2018) consider
the case where in-store customers (i.e., CD drivers) may reject offers from the central manager; they model
the problem as a bi-level stochastic program. They solve the bi-level stochastic program with a cost-driven
heuristic technique. Both Feng et al. (2021) and Torres et al. (2022a) consider the case where the
destinations of CD drivers are uncertain, while Torres et al. (2022b) assume that CD driver supply and
available time windows are unknown. They apply a branch and price algorithm to solve small instances and
a heuristic for large instances. Pugliese et al. (2023) capture travel time uncertainty and incorporate
penalties for arriving after a time window; they solve the stochastic model with Bender’s decomposition
and column generation. Finally, Silva et al. (2023) consider stochasticity in driver supply and customer
demand, where there is a correlation between the two sources of uncertainty. They solve the stochastic
model with a branch-price-and-cut algorithm.
Although not in the context of CD, studies on last-mile e-commerce delivery consider uncertainty in terms
of the presence/availability of customers at delivery locations (Özarık et al., 2021, 2023). However, these
two studies focus on “attended home delivery” with “valuable, perishable, or oversized items” (Özarık et
al., 2021, 2023), whereas, in this study, we focus on standard, non-perishable, non-luxury goods and assume
that drivers can drop off packages without interacting with customers.
Deterministic problems assume complete information about PDOs and CD drivers. Studies in the literature
usually formulate the deterministic CD problem as a multi-vehicle routing problem (m-VRP) or multivehicle pickup and delivery problem (m-PDP).
Some studies only consider CD drivers and omit DVs, e.g., Wang et al. (2016), Behrend and Meisel (2018),
Mofidi and Pazour (2019), and Le et al. (2021). Wang et al. (2016) model the problem as a minimum cost
flow problem and solve relatively large-scale problem instances. Behrend and Meisel (2018) integrate itemsharing with CD and solve the item-sharing and crowd-shipping problem using the exact method proposed
by Behrend et al. (2019). Mofidi and Pazour (2019) apply a two-stage bilevel program for the hierarchical
decision of the CD problem, where the upper-level decision is the assignment of PDOs to drivers, and the
lower-level decision is the driver’s choice of specific PDOs. Le et al. (2021) assume a similar “shared trip”
setting for CD drivers as this paper. However, they focus on comparing compensation schemes that consider
the shipper’s minimum willingness to pay and drivers’ minimum expected compensation. Another study
by Boysen et al. (2022) considers store employees as the workforce to deliver PDOs. However, none of the
studies in this paragraph consider the routing of DVs.
7

Ghaderi, Tsai, et al. (2022) propose a two-step task assignment and vehicle routing model. In the first step,
they profile the historical trajectory of CD drivers to obtain driver routes. In the second step, they match
delivery tasks to historical CD driver routes. However, by only using historical trajectories, their method is
unlikely to find optimal matches and vehicle routes.
Several studies in the literature focus on the deterministic problem and consider assignment and routing
decisions for both CD and DV drivers. Table 1 compares the studies most relevant to ours. Archetti et al.
(2016) formulate the problem as a classic VRP. Their model assumes a maximum of one task per SPV
driver, and they apply a multi-start heuristic by first assigning all PDOs to dedicated trucks and then solving
a series of small-scale bi-partite matching problems to assign PDOs to SPVs. Macrina et al. (2017) extend
the problem to a VRP with time windows (VRPTW) and allow SPVs to carry multiple PDOs. Dahle et al.
(2019) consider pickups and drop-offs and formulate the problem as a pickup and delivery problem with
time windows (PDPTW). Dahle et al. (2019) focus on comparing different compensation schemes; they
argue that compensation needs to be large enough to exceed the threshold of the driver’s willingness to
deliver. Dahle et al. (2019) conclude that CD can reduce total costs for logistic companies by 10-15%.
Unlike the prior three studies in Table 1, Kafle et al. (2017) and Macrina et al. (2020) consider
transshipment in CD. Kafle et al. (2017) assume a bidding procedure for CD drivers before assigning PDOs.
They formulate the problem as a generalized VRPTW. They solve the master problem by decomposing it
into two subproblems, namely, bidding selection and routing/scheduling of trucks. Macrina et al. (2020)
formulate the CD problem with transshipment nodes as a generalized version of the VRP with occasional
drivers. They propose a variable neighbor descent heuristic to solve the problem.
Another study that is worth reviewing but does not appear in the table is Ahamed et al. (2021). They also
route CD drivers and DVs. However, the ad-hoc CD drivers in their study are more similar to committed
drivers than CSD drivers, and their compensation depends on total distance instead of detour. Ahamed et
al. (2021) apply a deep reinforcement learning approach to solve the deterministic problem with instances
as large as 200 PDOs and 70 drivers.
Formulating the CD problem based on the VRP or PDP is quite natural. However, due to the NP-hard nature
of routing problems, and despite the rich literature on VRPs (Cordeau and Laporte, 2003; Golden et al.,
2008; Laporte, 1992; Laporte et al., 2000), obtaining optimal routes is difficult when the number of DVs
exceeds just 10-15, and there are no SPVs. Problems with hundreds of potential SPVs, in addition to DVs,
such as the one addressed in this study, would be near-impossible to solve.

8

Table 1: Comparison of Related Literature
Literature

Formulate

SPV
Capacity

SPV
Compensation

DV Constraint

Solution
Technique

Test Scale

Archetti et al.
(2016)

VRPOD

One

Package
Location

Capacity

Multi-Start
Heuristic

100 Tasks,
100 SPVs

Macrina et al.
(2017)

VRPODbased

Multiple

Detour

Capacity

CPLEX

100 Tasks,
100 SPVs

Dahle et al.
(2019)

PDPTWbased

Multiple

Thresholds

Capacity

MOSEL

70 Tasks,
100 SPVs

Kafle et al.
(2017)

VRPTWbased

Multiple

Bidding

Capacity

Decompose into
Two
Subproblems

100 Tasks,
60 SPVs

Macrina et al.
(2020)

VRPODbased

Multiple

Detour

Capacity

Variable
Neighbor Descent

100 Tasks

This Paper

Set CoverBased

Max. 4

Fixed +
Detour

Capacity +
Max Hours

Decomposition
Heuristic

900 Tasks,
1200 SPVs

Table 1 provides a comparison of studies addressing the deterministic CD problem. Notably, the current
paper differentiates itself from closely related studies along several dimensions. First, we extend the original
VRP with occasional drivers to a more generalized form that applies to DV and SPVs. The SPV drivers’
origins are also generalized instead of being only at the depot or in-store. We model the generalized problem
using a traditional VRP-based formulation and an alternative set-partitioning formulation. Second, we
employ a scheme compensating SPV drivers per PDO and detour mile. Third, the scale of the problem
instances we address is much larger than in previous studies, as highlighted in the last column of Table 1.
Fourth, we propose a novel decomposition heuristic that we tailored explicitly for large instances of the
CSD PDO-vehicle matching and vehicle routing problem with SPVs and DVs.

3

Problem Description and Mathematical Formulations
Table 2: Notations and Acronyms

Notation

Description

𝐴
𝑎𝑝𝑟𝑠
𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑠
𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑑
𝐵
𝐵𝑠
𝐵𝑠𝑀
𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑠
𝑑
𝑐𝑖𝑗

The arc set
Binary parameter, whether a PDO 𝑝 could be served by 𝑟 𝑡ℎ route of SPV 𝑠
Binary parameter, whether a node 𝑗 could be visited by 𝑖𝑡ℎ route of SPV 𝑠
Binary parameter, whether a node 𝑗 could be visited by 𝑖𝑡ℎ route of DV 𝑑
Travel budget (in minutes)
Travel budget of SPV 𝑠 (in minutes)
The maximum willingness of SPV 𝑠 to detour (in minutes)
Monetized travel cost to use link (𝑖, 𝑗) for SPV
Monetized travel cost to use link (𝑖, 𝑗) for DV
Monetized cost from origin to hub 0 for SPV 𝑠
Monetized cost from origin to destination for SPV 𝑠
Cost of using route 𝑖 for SPV 𝑠

𝑐𝑠𝑜
𝑐𝑠
𝑐𝑖𝑠

9

𝑐𝑖𝑑
𝑐𝑖𝑟
𝑐𝑟𝑠
𝐷
𝑑
𝑒𝑑
𝑒𝑜
𝐹𝑑
𝐺 = (𝑁, 𝐴)
(𝑖, 𝑗)
ℎ
𝑘
𝜆𝑖
𝑀
𝑁
𝑛𝑝
𝑛𝑠
𝑜
𝑃
𝑝
𝑞𝑑
𝑞𝑠
𝑅

Cost of using route 𝑖 for DV 𝑑
Cost of using route 𝑟 to serve PDO 𝑖
Cost of route 𝑟 for SPV 𝑠
Set of dedicated vehicles (DVs)
Individual DV, 𝑑 ∈ 𝐷
Coefficient for distance-based compensation for SPs
Coefficient for per-PDO compensation for SPVs
Fixed cost of using DV 𝑑
Network 𝐺 consists of Vertex/Node Set 𝑁 and Arc/Link Set 𝐴
A tuple to describe a link between node 𝑖 and node 𝑗
Distribution center node where DVs return after completing a route
An individual vehicle, either a DV or a SPV
Decision variable in the dual problem corresponding to constraint 𝑖
A large number
Node set
Drop-off node for PDO 𝑝
Destination node for SPV 𝑠
Depot
Set of PDOs
Individual PDO, 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃
The maximum number of stops for a DV route
The maximum number of PDOs that an SPV 𝑠 is willing to serve
The set of feasible routes across all SPVs

𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑒
𝑆
𝑠
𝜏𝑖𝑗
𝜏𝑝𝑑
𝑇𝐷
𝑇𝑑𝑠
𝑇𝑎𝑠
𝑝
𝑇𝑑
𝑝
𝑇𝑎
𝑘
𝑡𝑖
Θ
𝑢𝑑
𝑉
𝜔
𝑘
𝑥𝑖𝑗
𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠
𝑦𝑖𝑠
𝑦𝑖𝑑
𝑧𝑟𝑠
𝑧𝑠
Acronym
CD
CSD
D-H
DV
LNS
MFOCVRPTW
PDO

The set of feasible routes for only the SPVs assigned to PDOs during initial matching (i.e. in Step 2)
Shared-personal vehicle (SPV) set
Individual SPV, 𝑠 ∈ 𝑆
Time cost to use link (𝑖, 𝑗)
PDO pickup delay, constant
The maximum working time of DV
The earliest time that SPV 𝑠 could depart from its origin depot 𝑜
The latest time that SPV 𝑠 should arrive at its destination depot ℎ
Earliest pickup time for PDO 𝑝
Latest arrival time for PDO 𝑝
The time vehicle 𝑘 arrives at node 𝑖
Objective function value
Binary variable indicating whether the optimal solution includes DV
Total vehicle set
Service reward adjustment factor, a relatively large number
Binary variable indicating whether vehicle 𝑘 traverses link (𝑖, 𝑗)
Binary variable indicating whether SPV 𝑠 serves PDO 𝑝 on route 𝑟
Binary variable indicating whether SPV 𝑠 uses its 𝑖𝑡ℎ feasible route
Binary variable indicating whether DV 𝑑 uses its 𝑖𝑡ℎ feasible route
Binary variable indicating whether SPV 𝑠 uses route 𝑟
Binary variable indicating whether SPV 𝑠 carries any PDOs
Description
Crowdsourced Delivery (specifically for the last mile in this paper)
Crowdsourced Shared-trip Delivery
Decomposition Heuristic
Dedicated Vehicle
Large Neighborhood Search
Mix Fleet Open Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Window
Package Delivery Order

10

PDP(TW)
SA
SPV
VRP(TW)
VRPOD

3.1

Pickup and Delivery Problem (with Time Window)
Simulated Annealing
Shared Personal Vehicle
Vehicle Routing Problem (with Time Window)
Vehicle Routing Problem with Occasional Drivers

Problem Description

Let 𝑃 denote the set of PDOs that require delivery, indexed by 𝑝 ∈ 𝑃 . Each PDO (𝑝) may include multiple
items. We assume that all items are small- to medium-sized and easily fit in a standard sedan. We also
assume that the packages are standard (non-luxury) non-perishable goods and do not require the customer
to receive the package. These assumptions are consistent with existing CD services, including Amazon Flex.
𝑝
𝑝
Each PDO 𝑝 has a designated drop-off location, an earliest pickup time, 𝑇𝑑 , and latest delivery time, 𝑇𝑎 .
Two types of vehicles are used for delivery in the CSD system: SPVs (usually family-size sedans, wagons,
mini-vans, or SUVs) and DVs (usually medium-duty vans or trucks) for delivery. Let 𝑉 be the set of all
vehicles, 𝑆 be the set of SPVs, and 𝐷 be the set of DVs; hence, 𝑉 = {𝑆 ∪ 𝐷}. An individual SPV is
represented as 𝑠 (𝑠 ∈ 𝑆). The driver of an SPV indicates the maximum number of PDOs they are capable
or willing to carry/serve, and the parameter is denoted 𝑞𝑠 . Each SPV has its own origin and destination pair.
If any PDOs are assigned to an SPV, the SPV must first travel from its origin to the depot to pick up the
PDO(s); second, the SPV must deliver all PDO(s); and lastly, the SPV must travel to its own destination.
Let 𝑇𝑑𝑠 denote the earliest time an SPV 𝑠 can pick up PDOs at the depot and let 𝑇𝑎𝑠 denote the latest arrival
time that an SPV 𝑠 should arrive at its own destination.
Let 𝑑 denote a DV (𝑑 ∈ 𝐷). In addition to 𝑑 indexing the DV set 𝐷, and 𝑠 indexing the SPV set 𝑆, let 𝑘
index the set of all vehicles 𝑉 . Without loss of generality, we assume all DVs are identical and have a
maximum operating time, denoted as 𝑇 𝐷 . We also assume each DV has a maximum number of PDOs that
it can carry, denoted as 𝑞𝑑 . DVs are required to return to the depot/hub after completing delivery tasks.
The service network is defined on a graph 𝐺 = (𝑁, 𝐴). 𝑁 is the set of nodes, including the hub, all PDO
drop-off locations, and all origins and destinations of SPVs. 𝐴 is the set of arcs/links connecting nodes,
represented by the tuple (𝑖, 𝑗), where 𝑖, 𝑗 are nodes. Let 𝑜 ∈ 𝑁 denote the depot where DVs depart and let
ℎ ∈ 𝑁 denote the depot where DVs terminate their routes. Physically, 𝑜 and ℎ are both the depot. The dropoff location of a PDO 𝑝 is represented as 𝑛𝑝 . The designated destination node of an SPV 𝑠 is represented
as 𝑛𝑠 .
𝑑
The monetized travel cost of a link (𝑖, 𝑗) is represented as 𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑠 and 𝑐𝑖𝑗
for SPVs and DVs, respectively. The
travel time of a link (𝑖, 𝑗) is represented as 𝜏𝑖𝑗 . An SPV driver is compensated by the number of PDOs
completed and the total detour distance from delivering PDOs. The compensation per PDO is represented
by 𝑒. The detour distance calculation is demonstrated in Figure 2. The total detour cost (compensation)
for an SPV is calculated as 𝑐𝑠𝑜 + 𝑐𝑑 − 𝑐𝑠 , where 𝑐𝑠𝑜 is the monetized cost for an SPV to travel from its
origin to the depot; 𝑐𝑠 is the monetized cost for each SPV to travel directly from its origin to its
destination; and 𝑐𝑑 is the delivery route distance from the depot to the SPV’s destination.

11

Figure 2: Method for calculating SPV detour distance

3.2

m-VRP-based Formulation

The natural way to formulate a delivery problem involves exploiting VRP-based formulations since the
delivery problem has the features of an “unrepeated route” and “returning to the depot.” The CD problem
requires a generalization of the original VRP. First, we must route two vehicle types, SPVs and DVs.
Therefore, the problem is a heterogeneous- or mixed-fleet VRP (Baldacci et al., 2008; Irnich et al., 2014).
In addition, in this CSD problem, SPVs do not return to the depot, which makes the problem similar to
another variant of VRP, the so-called Open VRP (Li et al., 2007). Hence, we classify the CSD problem
with SPVs and DVs as a Mixed Fleet Open Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem with Time Windows
(MFOCVRPTW).
The decision variables are as follows:
•
•
•

𝑧𝑠 ∈ {0,1}, ∀ 𝑘 ∈ 𝑆.
𝑢𝑑 ∈ {0,1}, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝐷.
𝑘
𝑥𝑖𝑗
∈ {0,1}, ∀(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝐴, ∀ 𝑘 ∈ 𝑉.

𝑧𝑠 = 1, if SPV 𝑠 is used.
𝑢𝑑 = 1, if DV 𝑑 is used.
𝑘
𝑥𝑖𝑗
= 1, if arc (𝑖, 𝑗) is visited by vehicle 𝑘.

•

𝑡𝑖𝑘 ∈ ℝ+ , ∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑁, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑉.

Arrival time of vehicle 𝑘 at node 𝑖.

The formulation of the MFOCVRPTW is as follows.
3.2.1

Formulation 1
𝑘
𝑘
𝑑 𝑘
∑ {𝑧𝑠 [𝑒 𝑑 (𝑐𝑠𝑜 + ∑ 𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑠 𝑥𝑖𝑗
− 𝑐𝑠 ) + 𝑒 𝑜 ( ∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
− 1)]} + ∑ ∑ 𝑐𝑖𝑗
𝑥𝑖𝑗

𝐦𝐢𝐧 𝚯𝟏 =

𝒙,𝒛,𝒕,𝒖

(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐴

𝑘,𝑠∈𝑆

(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐴

𝑘∈𝐷 (𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐴

(1)

+ ∑ 𝐹𝑑 𝑢𝑑
𝑑∈𝐷

subject to
∑

𝑘
∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
=1

∀𝑖 ∈ {𝑛𝑝 }

𝑗∈{𝑛𝑝 ,𝑛s },𝑗≠𝑖 𝑘∈𝑉

12

(2)

𝑘
∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
=1

∑

∀𝑗 ∈ 𝑁\{ℎ}

(3)

∀𝑗 ∈ {𝑛𝑝 }

(4)

∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑆

(5)

∀𝑘 ∈ 𝐷

(6)

∀𝑑, 𝑘 ∈ 𝐷

(7)

∀𝑠, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑆

(8)

∀𝑑, 𝑘 ∈ 𝐷

(9)

𝑇𝑑𝑠 ≤ 𝑡𝑜𝑘

∀𝑠, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑆

(10)

𝑡𝑁𝑘𝑠 ≤ 𝑇𝑎𝑠

∀𝑠, 𝑘 ∈ 𝑆

(11)

𝑡ℎ𝑘 ≤ 𝑇 𝐷

∀𝑘 ∈ 𝐷

(12)

𝑖∈{𝑜,𝑛𝑝 },𝑖≠𝑗 𝑘∈𝑉

∑

𝑘
∑ 𝑥𝑖𝑗
−

∑

𝑖∈{𝑜,𝑛𝑝 },𝑖≠𝑗 𝑘∈𝑉

∑ 𝑥𝑗𝑙𝑘 = 0

𝑙∈{𝑛𝑝 ,𝑛s },𝑙≠𝑗 𝑘∈𝑉

𝑘
∑ 𝑥𝑖,𝑛
=1
s
𝑖∈𝑁\{𝑛s }
𝑘
𝑘
∑ 𝑥𝑜𝑗
− ∑ 𝑥𝑖,ℎ
=0
𝑗∈{𝑛𝑝 }

𝑖∈{𝑛𝑝 }

𝑘
𝑢𝑑 ≥ ∑ 𝑥𝑜𝑗
𝑗∈{𝑛𝑝 }
𝑘
𝑥𝑖𝑗
≤ 𝑧𝑠 × (𝑞s + 1)

∑
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐴\{(0,𝑛𝑠 )}

∑ 𝑥𝑘𝑖𝑗 ≤ 𝑢𝑑 × (𝑞𝑑 + 1)
(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐴

𝑝

𝑇𝑑 ≤ 𝑡𝑜𝑘 + (1 −

∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑃,

𝑘
∑ 𝑥𝑖,𝑛
)×𝑀
𝑝

∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑆

𝑖∈𝑁\{𝑛s }

𝑝

𝑡𝑛𝑘𝑝 ≤ 𝑇𝑎 + (1 −

∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑃,

𝑘
∑ 𝑥𝑖,𝑛
)×𝑀
𝑝

∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑆

𝑖∈𝑁\{𝑛s }
𝑘
𝑡𝑖𝑘 + 𝜏𝑖𝑗 ≤ 𝑡𝑗𝑘 + (1 − 𝑥𝑖𝑗
)×𝑀

∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑁, 𝑖 ≠ 𝑗 ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑉
∀𝑖, 𝑗 ∈ 𝑁

𝑘
𝑥𝑖𝑗
∈ {0,1}

∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑉

(13)

(14)
(15)
(16)

𝑧𝑠 ∈ {0,1}

∀𝑠 ∈ 𝑆

(17)

𝑢𝑑 ∈ {0,1}

∀𝑑 ∈ 𝐷

(18)

𝑡𝑖𝑘 ≥ 0

∀𝑖 ∈ 𝑁, ∀𝑘 ∈ 𝑉

(19)

In this formulation, the objective function aims to minimize the total cost of delivery using SPVs and DVs.
The first (long) term is the total SPV cost, which consists of distance- and per-PDO-based costs. The term
𝑘
𝑒 𝑑 (𝑐𝑠𝑜 + ∑(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐴 𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑠 𝑥𝑖𝑗
− 𝑐𝑠 ) represents the total distance (detour) cost of an SPV 𝑘 . The term
𝑘
𝑒 𝑜 (∑(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐴 𝑥𝑖𝑗
− 1) is the compensation paid to an SPV based on the number of fulfilled PDOs. 𝑒 𝑑 and 𝑒 𝑜

13

are two parameters (coefficients), which are the weights of distance-based and per-PDO-based rewards in
the total compensation. The relative magnitude of 𝑒 𝑑 and 𝑒 𝑜 determine the cost structure. For example,
when 𝑒 𝑑 = 0, drivers are rewarded only based on the number of PDOs fulfilled and not detour distance,
and vice versa for 𝑒 𝑜 = 0.
The first term is multiplied by 𝑧𝑠 , indicating whether SPV 𝑠 is used. If 𝑧𝑠 is 0, the SPV travels directly from
𝑑 𝑘
its origin to its destination. The second term, ∑𝑘∈𝐷 ∑(𝑖,𝑗)∈𝐴 𝑐𝑖𝑗
𝑥𝑖𝑗 , is the total delivery routing cost of all
DVs. The last term, ∑𝑑∈𝐷 𝐹𝑑 𝑢𝑑 , calculates the total fixed cost for using DVs.
(Additionally, we want to note that the distance-based cost term is quite general. For example, if we want
to compensate drivers based on total distance rather than detour distance, we can set 𝑐𝑠 to zero.)
Constraints (2) to (6) are routing constraints. Constraints (2) and (3) indicate that every node must be visited
once and only once by a vehicle (of either type). The constraints in Eqn. (4) are the flow balance constraints
at each node. The constraints in Eqn. (5) indicate that each SPV must arrive at its designated destination.
The constraints in Eqn. (6) require that if a DV leaves the depot, it must return to the depot. The constraints
in Eqn. (7) ensure that only “activated” DVs can serve requests. The constraints in Eqn. (8), together with
the constraints in Eqn. (5), ensure that when 𝑧𝑠 = 0, SPV 𝑠 travel directly to its own destination (𝑛𝑠 ), and
does not serve PDOs. Additionally, the constraints in Eqn. (8) regulate the number of delivery locations
that an SPV 𝑠 can visit and is the so-called “capacity” constraint. Similarly, the constraints in Eqn. (9)
regulate the number of delivery locations a DV can visit. In addition to Eqn. (9), DVs are also constrained
by the total number of working hours/distances, represented by Eqn. (12).
Constraints (10) to (15) are time window constraints. The constraints in Eqn. (10) guarantee that the trip
for an SPV starts after its earliest departure time. The constraints in Eqn. (11) guarantee that an SPV’s
arrival time at its destination must be no later than its latest arrival time. The constraints in Eqn. (13) ensure
that a PDO is only picked up after its earliest pickup time. The constraints in Eqn. (14) ensure that a PDO
𝑘
must be delivered no later than its latest delivery time. The constraints in Eqn. (15) indicate that if 𝑥𝑖𝑗
=1
(i.e., node 𝑗 is visited right after node 𝑖 by vehicle 𝑘), the arrival time of vehicle 𝑘 at node 𝑗 must be later
than the arrival time of vehicle 𝑘 at node 𝑖 plus the necessary travel time of arc (𝑖, 𝑗). The constraints in
Eqn. (15) also serve as sub-tour elimination constraints. The constraints in Eqn. (16) to (19) are the binary
and non-negativity constraints for decision variables.
Formulating the CSD problem from a vehicle routing perspective enables us to solve the problem by
leveraging the rich literature on VRP. Exact methods include Branch-and-bound (Christofides and Eilon,
1969; Little et al., 1963) and branch-and-cut or generating cuts (Baldacci et al., 2008; Baldacci et al., 2012;
Laporte et al., 1985). Heuristics include the Clarke and Wright saving heuristic (Clarke and Wright, 1964)
and multiple meta-heuristics (Gendreau and Potvin, 2005; Hansen et al., 2001; Nikolaev and Jacobson,
2010; Prins, 2004).
The MFOCVRPTW is an NP-hard problem, and using exact methods for large-scale problem instances is
computationally infeasible. Therefore, heuristics are preferable for large-scale problems. We construct a
decomposition-based heuristic (D-H) algorithm to solve the problem. The basis for the decomposition is a
set partitioning formulation, presented in the following subsection.

14

3.3

Set Partitioning Formulation

The m-VRP can be reformulated as a set partitioning problem (Baldacci et al., 2008; Desrosiers et al., 1992;
Laporte, 1992; Y. H. Lee et al., 2008; Ropke and Cordeau, 2009). This paper treats the collection of all
PDO locations {𝑛𝑝 } as a set of nodes to be covered/contained by a collection of route sets (the collections
of vehicle routes). Then, the problem is to assign each PDO delivery location to one feasible vehicle route
while minimizing the total cost of the collection of vehicle routes.
Like the approaches of Baldacci et al. (2008) and Ropke and Cordeau (2009), we formulate the CSD
problem as a set partitioning problem. Let 𝑦𝑖𝑠 be a binary decision variable and represent whether the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ
feasible route of SPV𝑠 is used. Correspondingly, let the binary variable 𝑦𝑖𝑑 represent whether the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ
feasible route of DV 𝑑 has been used. Let 𝑐𝑖𝑠 and 𝑐𝑖𝑑 be the cost of traveling on route 𝑖 for SPV 𝑠 and DV
𝑑, respectively. Let 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑠 and 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑑 be two binary parameters equal to 1 if it is feasible for 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝑖 of shared
(𝑠) or DV (𝑑) to service PDO 𝑗 . Formulation 2 provides the set partitioning formulation of the
MFOCVRPTW.
3.3.1

Formulation 2
𝑒 𝑑 ∑ ∑(𝑐𝑖𝑠 − 𝑐𝑠 ) 𝑦𝑖𝑠 + 𝑒 𝑜 ∑ ∑ ∑ 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑠 𝑦𝑖𝑠 + ∑ ∑ 𝑐𝑖𝑑 𝑦𝑖𝑑 + 𝐹𝑑 ∑ ∑ 𝑦𝑖𝑑

𝐦𝐢𝐧 𝚯𝟐 =
𝒚

𝑠

𝑖

𝑠

𝑖

𝑗

𝑑

𝑖

𝑑

(20)

𝑖

subject to
∑ ∑ 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑠 𝑦𝑖𝑠 + ∑ ∑ 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑑 𝑦𝑖𝑑 = 1
𝑠

𝑗

𝑑

𝑗

∑ 𝑦𝑖𝑠 = 1

∀𝑖 ∈ {𝑛𝑝 }

(21)

∀𝑠 ∈ 𝑆

(22)

𝑖

∑ 𝑦𝑖𝑑 ≤ 1

∀𝑑 ∈ 𝐷

(23)

𝑖

∑ ∑ 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑠 𝑦𝑖𝑠 ≤ 𝑞𝑠
𝑖

∑ ∑ 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑑 𝑦𝑖𝑑 ≤ 𝑞𝑑
𝑖

∀𝑠 ∈ 𝑆

(24)

∀𝑑 ∈ 𝐷

(25)

∀(𝑖, 𝑠) ∈ 𝑅, ∀(𝑖, 𝑑) ∈ 𝑅

(26)

𝑗

𝑗

𝑦𝑖𝑠 , 𝑦𝑖𝑑 ∈ {0,1}

The objective function in Eqn. (20) is similar to Eqn. (1) and minimizes the total cost. The first term,
𝑒 𝑑 ∑𝑠 ∑𝑖(𝑐𝑖𝑠 − 𝑐𝑠 ) 𝑦𝑖𝑠 is the total detour cost of SPVs, and the second term (𝑒 𝑜 ∑𝑠 ∑𝑖 ∑𝑗 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑠 𝑦𝑖𝑠 ) is the total
compensation per PDO fulfilled for SPVs. The third term is the total routing cost of DVs, and the last term
is the total fixed cost of using DVs.
The constraints in Eqn. (21) ensure that each PDO must appear once and only once on all vehicle routes.
The constraints in Eqn. (22) guarantee that one and only one feasible route for each SPV is selected in the
optimal solution. The constraints in Eqn. (23) state that no more than one feasible route for a DV should be
used. The constraints in Eqn. (24) and (25) limit the number of stops SPVs and DVs can make, respectively.
15

It is possible to build these two constraints into the construction of vehicle routes. The constraints in Eqn.
(26) are binary constraints for the decision variables.
A set partitioning problem can easily be converted to a bi-partite matching problem. Therefore, Formulation
2 provides a new starting point for solving the CSD problem as a matching/assignment problem between
PDOs and vehicle routes. Since the bi-partite matching problem has the feature of total unimodularity
(Yannakakis, 1985), it allows a linear relaxation of an integer problem.
However, challenges still remain. It is necessary to enumerate all possible routes for each SPV and DV to
ensure optimality. Generating all feasible routes for SPVs is possible because of the tight time-window
constraints on SPV trips/routes. The ability to enumerate all possible SPV routes makes the set partitioning
formulation quite appealing for the CSD problem. However, generating all possible DV routes is
computationally infeasible. Hence, most research that employs set partitioning to handle the standard VRP
problem relies on generating a ‘sufficient’ number of promising routes for each vehicle (Ryan et al., 1993).
Given that it is feasible to generate all SPV routes but not feasible to do the same for DVs, we propose
decomposing the problem by vehicle type. Hence, in the next section, we propose a Decomposition-based
Heuristic (D-H) to solve the CSD problem.

4

Decomposition Heuristic

4.1

Solution Algorithm Overview

The four major D-H algorithmic steps include SPV route generation, PDO-SPV assignment, DV routing,
and PDO switching between DVs and SPVs, summarized in Steps 1 through 4 below. The D-H algorithm
has two major components: obtaining a quality initial solution (Steps 1, 2, and 3) and an iterative procedure
to improve the solution (Step 4). Like Arslan et al. (2019), we also assume that the average cost of using
SPVs for PDO delivery is lower than that of using DVs.
•

•

•

•

Step 1: SPV route generation
o Generate the set of feasible routes for each SPV in 𝑆0 .
▪ Most of these routes can be generated offline  described below.
Step 2: PDO-SPV route assignment
o Assign PDOs to SPVs. This problem is similar to a bi-partite matching problem and can be
efficiently solved for large problem instances. The primary objective of the matching problem is to
maximize PDOs assigned to SPVs.
o For each SPV assigned to a PDO, store these SPVs and their feasible routes for consideration in
Step 4.
Step 3: DV routing
o Run a multi-vehicle routing problem insertion heuristic to assign unassigned (after Step 2) PDOs
to DVs and route DVs.
o At the end of Step 3, we have an initial feasible solution and associated cost.
Step 4: Swapping PDOs between SPVs and DVs for solution improvements
o Run SA-inspired swapping procedure to exchange PDOs between SPVs and DVs iteratively.
▪ The procedure and rules of switching are described in Section 4.4

The next few subsections describe these four steps in more detail.

16

4.2

Step 1: Shared Vehicle Route Generation with Budgeted K-shortest Paths

This section describes the first step of the D-H, where we generate the k-shortest paths subject to budget
constraints. We generate the possible routes from the depot to different SPV destination locations for
various values for willingness to detour. The quality of the k-shortest paths is a primary determinant of the
solution quality of the PDO-SPV route assignment problem, and we attempt to exhaustively generate all
routes for an SPV under a travel budget constraint.
Unlike the other steps in the D-H, the logistics platform can compute and store a large combination of SPV
routes once (e.g., at the beginning of the month or year), as opposed to needing to recompute the routes
every time (e.g., every morning) they solve a CSD problem instance. Hence, we say that this subproblem
can be addressed “offline.” It is possible to compute and store these SPV routes because (i) there are a
limited number of delivery locations in the region, (ii) there are a limited number of SPV trip origins and
destinations in the region, (iii) the maximum detour for any SPV is quite limited, and (iv) an SPV can only
serve a small number of PDO locations in one route. Then, when solving a CSD problem instance, we can
“activate” the set of SPV routes that are consistent with the SPV drivers for a given problem instance.
Handling Step 1 offline is beneficial because it is computationally intensive, and therefore, the logistics
provider can expend computation resources on Steps 2-4 each time they solve a CSD problem instance.
We define the k-shortest paths with budget constraints problem as follows: Given a graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸), find
all possible paths between start node 𝑠 and target node 𝑡 that are within the travel time/cost/budget, denoted
by 𝐵.
It is worth noting that the budget 𝐵 in this section is not equivalent to the maximum willingness to detour
of SPV drivers, although they are related. The maximum willingness to detour of an SPV driver is defined
as the maximum time the driver is willing to delay arriving at their destination given the departure time
from their origin, where delay includes waiting at the depot in addition to network routes that are not on the
shortest path to the SPV driver’s destination. In contrast, in this step, we generate routes for SPVs from the
depot to their destinations (the blue paths in Figure 2), and therefore, the budget 𝐵 for an SPV 𝑠 equals the
SPV’s maximum willingness to detour (𝐵𝑠𝑀 ) minus the shortest path travel time from the SPV’s origin to
the depot (𝑐𝑠𝑜 ) and PDO pickup delay time (𝜏𝑝𝑑 ), represented as 𝐵𝑠 = 𝐵𝑠𝑀 − 𝑐𝑠𝑜 − 𝜏𝑝𝑑 .
To solve the k-shortest path with budget constraints problem, we implement a modified version of Yen’s
algorithm (Yen, 1971) that includes budget constraints. Appendix A provides the pseudocode for the
budgeted Yen’s algorithm.
The complexity of Yen’s original algorithm is 𝑂(𝑘𝑉(𝐸 + 𝑉log𝑉), with 𝑘 being the number of paths to be
generated. The budgeted Yen’s algorithm keeps the heap structure of storing paths and applies Dijkstra’s
algorithm for shortest path finding, which is 𝑂(𝐸 + 𝑉𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑉). In the worst-case scenario, when the network
is fully connected, and the budget is large, all the nodes along the spur path will be visited. In this case,
Dijkstra’s algorithm would be called 𝐵 × |𝑉| times if we treat budget 𝐵 as a large constant. The overall
complexity for the budgeted Yen’s Algorithm is 𝑂(𝐵𝑉(𝐸 + 𝑉log𝑉). For a 2000 SPV case with a 10-minute
depot-to-driver-destination delay budget, the computational time for the budgeted Yen’s Algorithm is
around 5 minutes. For a 20-minute depot-to-driver-destination delay budget in our case study, Yen’s
Algorithm takes roughly 48 minutes.

17

4.3

Step 2: Matching PDOs to SPV Routes

The next step in the D-H is to match the PDOs with SPVs. However, instead of matching PDOs to the SPV
vehicles themselves, the D-H algorithm attempts to match PDOs to SPV routes that were generated from
the previous step. Formulation 3 provides a formulation of the PDO-SPV route assignment problem.
4.3.1

Formulation 3
∑ ∑ ∑ 𝜔𝑎𝑝𝑟𝑠 𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 − ∑ ∑ 𝑐𝑟𝑠 𝑧𝑟𝑠

𝐦𝐚𝐱 𝚯𝟑 =
𝒙𝒑𝒓𝒌

𝑠

𝑟

𝑝

𝑠

(27)

𝑟

subject to:
∑ ∑ 𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 ≤ 1
𝑠

∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑃

(28)

∀𝑠 ∈ 𝑆

(29)

∀(𝑟, 𝑠) ∈ 𝑅

(30)

∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑃, ∀(𝑟, 𝑠) ∈ 𝑅

(31)

𝑟

∑ 𝑧𝑟𝑠 ≤ 1
𝑟

∑ 𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 ≤ 𝑧𝑟𝑠 𝑞s
𝑝

𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 , 𝑧𝑟𝑠 ∈ {0,1}

•
•

𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 ∈ {0,1},
𝑧𝑟𝑠 ∈ {0,1},

Equal to one if PDO 𝑝 is assigned to route 𝑟 of SPV 𝑠
Equal to one if SPV 𝑠 uses route 𝑟

The objective function (27) maximizes the total benefit of matching PDOs to SPV routes. To encourage
successful matchings, 𝜔 (a large number) is introduced as a reward term. This operationalizes the strategy
to initially match as many PDOs to SPVs as possible. In the objective function, 𝑎𝑝𝑟𝑠 is a binary parameter
that indicates whether the 𝑟 𝑡ℎ route/path of SPV 𝑠 can feasibly serve PDO 𝑝. The constraints in Eqn. (28)
guarantee that a PDO is served by at most one route and at most one vehicle. The constraints in Eqn. (29)
ensure each SPV only travels on at most one path through the depot. The constraints in Eqn. (30), ensure a
PDO 𝑝 is only assigned to route 𝑟 if a SPV 𝑠 is assigned to route 𝑟. If 𝑧𝑟𝑠 equals zero, SPV 𝑠 does not use
route 𝑟, and therefore, no PDO should be served by vehicle 𝑠 on route 𝑟. Moreover, if 𝑧𝑟𝑠 equals one, then
vehicle 𝑠 does use route 𝑟, and the total PDOs carried by the vehicle should not exceed the maximum
number of PDOs that SPV 𝑠 is willing to serve. Constraint (30) also acts as a linking constraint between
decision variables 𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 and 𝑧𝑟𝑠 .
Without Constraints (29) and the decision variable 𝑧𝑟𝑠 , Formulation 3 becomes a bi-partite matching
problem, which is solvable in polynomial time and has a complexity of 𝑂(𝑛3 ). To take advantage of the
complexity of the bi-partite matching problem, we implement a Benders decomposition on Formulation 3
for large-scale cases when the SPV’s willingness to detour is high. The formulation and procedure for
performing Benders decomposition are as follows.
4.3.2

Formulation 4

Master Problem (MP)
𝐦𝐚𝐱 𝚯𝐌𝐏 =
𝒛𝒓𝐬

(32)

𝑍

18

subject to
∑ 𝑧𝑟𝑠 ≤ 1

∀𝑠 ∈ 𝑆

(33)

𝑟

(34)

𝑍 ≤ 𝐶𝑢𝑡𝑠
𝑧𝑟𝑠 ∈ {0,1}

∀(𝑟, 𝑠) ∈ 𝑅

(35)

Subproblem
∑ ∑ 𝜔𝑎𝑝𝑟𝑠 𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 − ∑ 𝑐𝑟𝑠 𝑧̅𝑟𝑠

𝐦𝐚𝐱 𝚯𝐒𝐏 (𝒛̅𝒓𝒔 ) =
𝒙𝒑𝒓𝒌

(𝑟,𝑠) 𝑝

(36)

(𝑟,𝑠)

subject to
∑ 𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 ≤ 1

∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑃

(37)

∀(𝑟, 𝑠) ∈ 𝑅

(38)

∀(𝑟, 𝑠) ∈ 𝑅

(39)

(𝑟,𝑠)

∑ 𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 ≤ 𝑧̅𝑟𝑠 𝑞𝑠
𝑝

𝑥𝑝𝑟𝑠 ≥ 0

The dual subproblem is formulated as follows:
𝐦𝐢𝐧 𝚯𝐃𝐒𝐏 (𝒛̅𝒓𝒔 ) =
𝝀

∑ 𝜆𝑝 + ∑ 𝑧̅𝑟𝑠 𝑞𝑠 𝜆(𝑟,𝑠) − ∑ 𝑐𝑟𝑠 𝑧̅𝑟𝑠
𝑝

(𝑟,𝑠)

(40)

(𝑟,𝑠)

subject to
𝜆𝑝 + 𝜆(𝑟,𝑠) ≥ ω𝑎𝑝𝑟𝑠

∀𝑝 ∈ 𝑃, ∀(𝑟, 𝑠) ∈ 𝑅

(41)
(42)

𝝀≥0

Formulation 4 presents the master problem (MP) and subproblem (SP) of the PDO-SPV route assignment
problem. The subproblem is a linear assignment problem with a time complexity of 𝑂(𝑛3 ). To obtain
optimal cuts (i.e., corner solutions), the study solves a dual sub-problem (DSP). When initialized with a
feasible solution from the master problem, the subproblem is always feasible because the linear assignment
problem always has a solution given valid parameter settings. Hence, the dual subproblem is never
unbounded, and one does not need to generate feasibility cuts (i.e., extreme rays) for the master problem.
Therefore, the cuts in Eqn. (34) are all optimality cuts, which can be represented by line 6 in Algorithm 1.
The solution procedure is a standard Benders decomposition procedure, displayed below.

19

Algorithm 1: Benders decomposition for PDO – SPV assignment problem
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Initialization:
A feasible solution ̃𝒛𝟎𝒓,𝒔 ; 𝐿𝐵 = −∞, 𝑈𝐵 = +∞. Iteration counter t = 1
While 𝑈𝐵 − 𝐿𝐵 > 𝜀:
Solve the dual subproblem (DSP)
Get extreme points ̃𝝀𝒕
𝑡−1
𝑡−1
Add cut 𝑍 ≤ ∑𝑖 𝜆̅𝑡𝑝 + ∑(𝑟,𝑠) 𝑧̅𝑟𝑠
𝑞𝑠 𝜆̅𝑡(𝑟s) − ∑(𝑟,𝑠) 𝑐𝑟𝑠 𝑧̅𝑟𝑠
𝑡−1
𝐿𝐵 = max {𝐿𝐵, ∑𝑖 𝜆̅𝑡𝑝 + ∑(𝑟,𝑠) 𝑧̅𝑟𝑠
[(𝑞𝑠 + 1)𝜆̅𝑡(𝑟,𝑠) − 𝑐𝑟𝑠 ]}

8
9
10
11

Solve the master problem
∗
Get solution 𝑈𝐵 = ΘMP
End While
̃𝒑𝒓𝒔 , ̃𝒛𝒓𝒔
Return: 𝐿𝐵, 𝒙

In Formulation 4, the subproblem is convex and is a restricted problem of the original problem (Formulation
3). Therefore, solving the subproblem gives a lower bound (LB) for the original problem. On the other hand,
the master problem is non-convex with all integer constraints and is a relaxation of the original problem.
Solving the master problem gives an upper bound (UB). Compared with the original problem, the problem
size (number of constraints and variables) is significantly smaller. Adding cuts generated from the
subproblem restricts the master problem gradually and reduces the gap between LB and UB.
After obtaining the initial matching results, we identify all SPVs assigned to at least one PDO, and we store
their feasible routes (regardless of used or not). We call this reduced set of SPV candidate routes, 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑒
We will use 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑒 in Step 4 when swapping PDOs between SPVs and DVs.

4.4

Step 3: Assigning PDOs to DVs and Routing DVs

After solving the PDO-SPV route assignment problem, we solve the m-VRP to assign previously
unassigned PDOs to DVs and to route the DVs (Step 3). To solve the problem, we employ the insertion
algorithm described in Campbell and Savelsbergh (2004). The insertion heuristic has a time complexity of
𝑂(𝑛3 ). Appendix B includes the pseudocode.

4.5

Step 4: Package Delivery Order Switching

The last step of the D-H algorithm involves an iterative procedure for switching PDOs between SPVs and
DVs. Algorithm 2 in the flowchart below describes each step of the switching procedure.
We start with the initial solution generated after Steps 2 and 3, labeled as 𝑥 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 . The total cost of solution
𝑥 𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 is Θ𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 . We set a starting temperature of 𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝0, and a cooling schedule (𝑆𝑡𝑒𝑝𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑙 ), which is ten
percent of the current temperature, 𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑟 . The initial direction of switching is from SPV to DV. We
first check the switching direction; if it is SPV to DV, we choose 𝑛 random PDOs to move. We keep 𝑛 as
a small integer parameter to move to neighboring solutions; in the case study, we use 𝑛 = 1. After switching,
we obtain the candidate solution, 𝑥 𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 , and the total cost of the candidate solution, Θ𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑 .
When the switching direction is from SPV to DV, we first update the assignment results of the SPVs. Since
we only remove PDOs from the SPV assignments and calculate the cost reduction, we do not rematch SPVs
and PDOs. We insert the PDOs moving from SPVs to DV routes using the insertion algorithm described in
Step 3. We then obtain a candidate solution and can calculate the new SPV cost (small reduction) and DV

20

cost (small increase). The total cost of the candidate solution is the summation of the DV and SPV cost
components.

Algorithm 2: The PDO Switching Procedure
When the switching direction is from DV to SPV, and the number of PDOs switched is a small integer, we
search through all feasible routes of unused SPVs and the existing routes of used SPVs. We then assign
each PDO to the least-cost route, subject to all relevant constraints. If the number of PDOs to switch is
large, e.g., more than 5 PDOs, we solve the PDO-SPV route matching problem as described in Step
2/Section 4.3. However, when solving this matching (and any PDO-SPV route matching in Step 4), we only
consider the reduced SPV candidate route set, 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑢𝑐𝑒 . After the PDO-SPV assignment process, if any
PDOs cannot be served by an SPV, these PDOs are inserted back into DVs using the insertion heuristic.
After obtaining the SPV assignment and DV routes, we have the candidate solution and total cost.
Next, we follow the standard procedure of SA to evaluate the solution and decide whether to keep the
solution. Note that we also create a result tag that is either “Accept” or “Reject” to represent the status of
the current solution. After evaluating the candidate solution, we decide on the direction of switching using
a probability test. We introduce another parameter 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡 . 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡 is between 0.5 𝑎𝑛𝑑 1; in the
case study, we apply 0.75. Similarly, if the candidate solution does not perform better than the current best
solution, we have a 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑑𝑖𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡 chance of flipping the switching direction for the next iteration.
When the direction is to move PDOs from DV to SPV, if the direction flip stems from a non-improvement
in solution quality from the previous iteration, we move a large number of PDOs. The large number is a
proportion (𝑘%) of all PDOs currently assigned to DVs. In the case study, we set 𝑘% = 10%. The purpose
is to escape from the current state.
We do not explain the selection procedure for moving PDOs from DV to SPV in the flowchart due to space
restrictions, but we will explain it herein. We first define two sets of PDOs.
21

SPV-eligible PDOs: PDOs successfully assigned to an SPV in a prior iteration.
SPV-possible PDOs: PDOs not assigned to an SPV in any prior iteration.
After obtaining the SPV-eligible and SPV-possible sets, we perform a Monte Carlo method to select PDOs.
We first calculate the number of PDOs to switch. For every PDO to switch, we generate a random number
between 0 and 1 and compare it with the 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖 , where:
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖 = exp (−

𝐶𝑢𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒
)
𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑇𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒

If 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖 ≥ 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑(0,1), we choose a DV-served PDO that is in the SPV-eligible set; otherwise, we
choose a DV-served PDO that is in the SPV-possible set. The rationale behind the selection procedure is as
follows. In the early stages of annealing, 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖 is smaller than 0.5 and encourages the selection of PDOs
from the SPV-possible set to maximize the number of PDOs that SPVs can serve. In the late stages,
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑖 is closer to 1, which means that the PDOs that are in the SPV-possible set are less likely to be
chosen.
In the next two sections, we conduct a real-world city-scale case study of CSD and compare the
computational results from the D-H algorithm with the exact method of solving the MFOCVRPTW.

5

Numerical Case Study Overview

We conducted a numerical case study using the City of Irvine, CA, USA road network. The network
contains 442 nodes and 648 links. We selected one node, displayed as a blue triangle in Figure 3, as the
depot. Figure 3 displays the City of Irvine network marked with nodes, links, a depot, and PDO destinations.
Each PDO has a latest permissible delivery time (time window). We randomly selected a latest delivery
time value for each PDO from the following set: {12pm, 4pm, 8pm}.

22

Figure 3: Case study network structure
Table 3 displays the relevant parameter values for the numerical case study. The case study includes 200
PDOs and a maximum of 1200 SPVs. We uniformly distributed the PDO locations across the network.
Multiple packages may be in the same PDO, and multiple PDOs may share the same physical delivery
location.
Table 3: Parameter Values in the Numerical Case Study
Parameter
Area
Depot location
Number of nodes
Number of PDOs
Number of SPVs
SPV average speed
SPV max stop willingness
SPV max willingness to detour
SPV detour compensation rate
SPV PDO compensation
SPV PDO pickup time at depot
DV average speed
DV per mile cost
DV fixed cost
* The benchmark case

Value
32 𝑚𝑖𝑙𝑒 2
152688
442
200
0 ~ 1,200
40 mph
1~4
20, 25, 30*
$ 0.56 per mile
$ 1.5 per PDO
10 minutes
30 mph
$ 1.5 per mile
$ 120 per use

23

We obtain SPV trips using the California State Travel Demand Model. Each SPV has a maximum number
of stops that it will make. Each SPV driver has an earliest starting time (EST) from their origin and a latest
arrival time (LAT) at their destination. The maximum total tour time (not the maximum tour detour time)
that an SPV can afford is the difference between LAT and EST. The maximum willingness to detour for a
given SPV 𝑠 is as follows: 𝐿𝐴𝑇𝑠 − 𝐸𝑆𝑇𝑠 − 𝑐𝑠 , where 𝑐𝑠 is the shortest path travel time between the trip
origin and destination locations of SPV 𝑠.
The baseline maximum willingness to detour is 30 minutes. In the sensitivity analysis, we compare two
additional willingness to detour values of 20 and 25 minutes against the base scenario of 30 minutes. We
consider a waiting/pickup delay at the depot for each SPV and set the delay time at 10 minutes. This time
includes loading PDOs into the SPV and entering and exiting the depot facility. When applying Yen’s
algorithm, we deduct this ten minutes from the total allowable depot-to-SPV destination tour time when
generating SPV routes. We assume SPVs travel 40 miles per hour and DVs travel 30 miles per hour. In the
base scenario, we assume that once the platform matches a PDO to an SPV driver, the driver will not reject
the assignment. As a comparison, we consider possible scenarios where some drivers reject the assignment.
As mentioned, SPV drivers receive compensation for each PDO they deliver and each detour mile required
to deliver those PDOs. We use the IRS’s standard mileage rate for business travel, $0.56/mile, for detourbased compensation (Internal Revenue Service, 2021). We also use $1.50 as the compensation per PDO
delivered. Based on these parameter values, the top graph in Figure 4 displays SPV driver compensation
for one personal trip as a function of detour mileage and PDOs delivered.
The bottom graph in Figure 4 also displays the equivalent hourly SPV driver compensation rate, assuming
an average SPV speed of 40 miles per hour and 10 minutes of delay at the depot. Ahamed et al. (2021) and
Kafle et al. (2017) use an hourly rate of $10, while Le et al. (2021), who assume CD drivers share trips
with parcels, use an hourly rate of $12. Hence, aside from SPV drivers with short detours and only one
PDO to deliver, the compensation rate for SPV drivers in our study is relatively high (at least on an hourly
basis).

24

Figure 4: Total SPV driver compensation (top) and the hourly SPV driver compensation rate (bottom)
as a function of detour miles and PDOs served.
There are also several homogenous DVs available at the depot. The DVs are responsible for delivering the
PDOs not served by the SPVs. We refer to Amazon Logistics (2021) for the normal size of vans and trucks
used for urban last-mile delivery, which are usually 9’ to 12’ vans or trucks (e.g., Ford Transit). The DV
fixed cost in this study is $120, where the driver’s daily salary/wage is the main cost component. The
driver's hourly wage is obtained from Indeed (Indeed.com, 2023). The DV variable per-mile cost of
$1.5/mile comes from the Alternative Fuel Data Center (U.S. Department of Energy, 2023), where
$0.4/mile is from fuel and $1.1/mile is from depreciation, maintenance, and other minor costs.
The next section compares solving the CSD problem with the D-H and a commercial solver. The metrics
used for comparison are the computational time and the optimality gap.

25

To evaluate the effectiveness of a CSD system, we compare the total delivery cost and vehicle miles traveled
(VMT) of using CSD and the conventional DV-only delivery system. We also analyze the impact of SPV
quantity by varying the number of candidate SPVs. We also conduct a sensitivity analysis on the impact of
the SPV maximum willingness to detour, where we define the maximum willingness to detour as the latest
time the driver is willing to arrive at their destination minus their earliest departure time.

6

Results and Discussion

This section compares our novel D-H algorithm to a commercial solver and an LNS algorithm regarding
solution quality and computation run time (Section 6.1). Then, we use the D-H algorithm to analyze the
costs and benefits of the proposed CSD system at scale under several different sets of input parameters
(Section 6.2-6.7).

6.1

Computational experiments and comparisons

We conduct four computational experiments in this subsection. The first compares the computational results
of the D-H algorithm with those of an exact solution method. The second compares the D-H algorithm with
an LNS algorithm. The first two experimental comparisons contain small-scale problems (e.g., 10 PDOs,
10 SPVs) and larger-scale problems (e.g., 100 PDOs, 1000 SPVs). The third analyzes the scalability of the
D-H algorithm concerning the number of PDOs. The fourth illustrates the evolution of the D-H algorithm
for a large number of iterations.
We implemented the D-H in Python 3.7 and used the exact solution method in the commercial solver Gurobi
(version 10.0.1). We use a 2.20 GHz Intel Xeon Server with 128 GB RAM. Since the number of PDOswitching-iterations impacts computational time and solution quality, we always use 220 as the number of
iterations for the PDO-switching process.
For a complete comparison, we varied the number of PDOs from 10 to 100, where we distributed the PDOs
uniformly in the study area. We also randomly generated the origins and destinations of SPVs throughout
the region. In the experiments in this section, every SPV has a fixed detour time of 30 minutes. The
experiments compare the computational time and the optimality gaps.
We set the computational time limit for Gurobi to 1,200 seconds. If Gurobi does not finish the optimization
process after 1,200 seconds, then we report the optimality gap between the primal and dual problems, along
with the optimality gap between the D-H solution and the incumbent best feasible Gurobi solutions.
6.1.1

D-H vs. Commercial Solver

We first compare the computational results between the commercial solver and the D-H. For small-scale
problems (i.e., the first two rows of Table 4), in the four cases of 10 PDOs, the optimality gap between the
D-H and the exact method is 1.2%. The D-H algorithm requires significantly less computational time. In
the case of 20 PDOs, the optimality gap is less than 3% in all experiments. Hence, the D-H can obtain
solutions to small problem instances that are comparable in quality to exact methods while using
considerably less computational effort.
For large-scale problems (i.e., the last two rows of Table 4), the commercial solver begins to slow down
considerably. For the case of 50 PDOs and 50 SPVs, the commercial solver does not obtain the optimal
solution within the time limit. In fact, the D-H method obtains a better solution than the commercial solver.
The computational time is also one-tenth of the time used by the exact method. For the case of 50 PDOs
26

and 100 SPVs, the D-H also finds a better solution than the commercial solver. Moreover, for cases with
more than 50 PDOs and 500 SPVs, the commercial solver cannot obtain a feasible integer solution.
Conversely, the D-H algorithm can find solutions to these large problem instances in a relatively short
period (i.e., around 10 minutes in nearly all cases).
6.1.2

D-H Swapping Procedure vs. Large Neighborhood Search Algorithm

The second comparison is between the D-H algorithm and the LNS algorithm. When implementing the
LNS, we followed the instructions in Pisinger & Ropke (2019). To make a fair comparison between D-H
and LNS, we initialize the LNS with the same initial solution that we use for the swapping procedure in DH. Since the LNS hyper-parameter values significantly impact the performance of heuristic algorithms, we
also tune the LNS hyper-parameters, such as the stop criteria and destruction size. We keep 70% of the
existing matches every iteration and destroy/reconstruct the other 30%. We apply the same stopping criteria
from the swapping procedure in D-H. The number of iterations is the same for the LNS and D-H swapping
procedure (220 iterations). Appendix C includes the pseudocode for the LNS algorithm.
In the 10-PDO scenarios in Table 4, we observe that both LNS and D-H produce the same solution of 137.6
(a 1.2% optimality gap) for the first two columns. This solution, 137.6, is, in fact, the initial solution to both
the LNS and the D-H swapping procedure subroutines. Neither LNS nor the D-H swapping procedure
improves the initial solution, which indicates the quality of the initial solution obtained from Steps 1 – 3 in
the D-H algorithm. In the cases with 50 and 100 SPVs (i.e., the last two columns of the first row in Table
4), the LNS improves the solution, while the D-H swapping procedure keeps the initial solution. However,
LNS takes a relatively longer time than the D-H swapping procedure. In fact, in all the computational
experiments, LNS results in a longer CPU time than D-H. In some scenarios, LNS almost doubles the
computational time of the D-H algorithm (e.g., the case with 50 PDO and 500 SPVs). The reason is that the
LNS “destroy and repair procedure” ruins 30% of all matches and requires rematching every iteration. On
the other hand, the D-H swapping procedure only executes the destroy and repair procedure after several
iterations of “non-improvement behavior,” and the percentage to destroy and repair is only 10%.
In large-scale scenarios (i.e., the last two rows in Table 4), the D-H swapping procedure outperforms the
LNS algorithm in 5 out of 8 experiments regarding solution quality. While LNS generates better solutions
for the other 3, the difference is only 0.8% to 1.2%. Again, the computational time required for LNS is
much longer than D-H for the large-scale instances.
We conclude that the D-H swapping procedure outperforms LNS when considering solution quality and
run time jointly. We also want to note that the entire LNS depends on a quality initial solution obtained
from Steps 1-3 of the D-H algorithm. If LNS were to start from a random feasible solution, it would likely
take even longer to find solutions of a similar quality.
Lastly, we note that metaheuristics such as LNS depend on parameter tuning. More parameter tuning could
improve both the LNS and each of the steps of the D-H algorithm.

27

Table 4: Computational Experiments Comparing D-H, LNS, and Commercial Solver (Solver)
No of PDOs

Solver
SPVs

10

LNS

D-H

Solver

20

LNS

D-H

Solver

50

LNS

D-H

100

1.6

1.4

1.1

2.3

1.8

1.1

10.5

2.5

1.2

65.9

4.2

1.3

Cost

136

137.6

137.6

136

137.6

137.6

136

136.6

137.6

136

137.2

137.6

1.20%

1.20%

1.20%

1.20%

0.44%

1.20%

0.88%

1.20%

20

40

100

200

Time (s)

130.6

10.7

6.54

308.9

12.3

6.8

455.2

22.8

16.9

1105.6

31.6

25.3

Cost

142.4

144.5

144.5

142.4

143.8

144.5

139.2

141.4

139.7

138.2

140.2

139.7

2.70%

2.70%

0.98%

2.70%

1.58%

0.40%

1.45%

1.10%

OPT Gap
SPVs

50

100

250

500

Time (s)

1200

161

126

1200

210

153

1200

287

193

1200

403

226

Cost

194.5

189.3

191.6
-1.5%
(13.6%)
*

244.5

190.4

191.2
-19.5%
(35.4%)
*

---

187.2

185.1

---

182.6

181.9

OPT Gap

SPVs
100

Solver

Time (s)

SPVs

50

D-H

10

OPT Gap

20

LNS

100

200

500

1000

Time (s)

1200

722

493

1200

855

527

1200

983

586

1200

1127

613

Cost

---

335.1

327.4

---

322.8

322.3

---

282.7

283.2

---

251.1

246.4

OPT Gap
1. The gap between the D-H/LNS method and an exact method if Gurobi outputs a solution in 1200 secs.
2. The optimality gap and the dual gap (in parenthesis) between the primal and dual problem solutions, if Gurobi does not finish in 1200 secs. (Marked with *)
3. Not applicable if Gurobi does not start cutting planes within 1200 secs (Marked with --- ).

28

6.1.3

D-H Scalability with respect to Delivery Tasks

To test how the computational time changes as the number of PDOs increases, we fix the number of SPVs
at 800 and vary the number of PDOs from 100 to 800. We also set the number of D-H iterations to 200.
Figure 5 displays the computational results.
Figure 5 shows that the algorithm scales well when the number of PDOs is smaller than 600. However,
when the number of PDOs exceeds 600, the computational time increases rapidly. After 800 PDOs, the
run time exceeds the preset computational time limit of 3 hours.
Combining Table 4 and Figure 5, we conclude that the D-H scales better with the number of SPVs than
the number of PDOs. However, we want to note that as the density of PDOs increases, it is possible to
start grouping PDOs together before determining vehicle-PDO matches and vehicle routes. The impact of
this grouping approach on solution quality will decrease as PDO density increases within a region.

Figure 5: Computational time as a function of the number of PDOs
6.1.4

Insights into D-H Search

To illustrate how the D-H searches for solutions, we visualize a large-scale problem instance with 200
PDOs and 1200 SPVs. We run the D-H algorithm for 350 iterations, which lasts around 2 hours. Figure 6
shows how the solution changes from one iteration to the next.
Figure 6 shows that the algorithm finds a relatively good solution (objective value of 477.5) in the first 50
iterations, which takes about 20 mins. Then, the algorithm gradually improves the solution until about
iteration 80, where the objective value is 469.2. After that, the solution quality fluctuates significantly
until iteration 160 (466.9), wherein the algorithm finds the best solution over the first two hours.
There are two reasons for the large spikes in Figure 6. One reason is that when additional PDOs move
from SPV to DV, an additional DV is required to maintain problem feasibility related to vehicle capacity
or route duration. As the solution adds a DV, the cost drastically increases. Another reason is the batch
movement of PDOs from DVs to SPVs. In both cases, after the large spike, the algorithm gradually
improves the solution quality.

29

Figure 6: Trend in solutions
6.1.5

Concluding Statement on Computational Efficiency and Solution Quality

In summary, the D-H algorithm effectively identifies high-quality solutions while solving large-scale
problems quickly. For small-scale problems, the algorithm achieves near-optimal solutions in a fraction of
the time of an exact solution method. For medium-scale problems, the D-H outperforms a commercial
solver within the specified time limit. For large-scale problems, when the commercial solver cannot even
obtain a feasible solution, the D-H obtains solutions very quickly.
The comparison between D-H and LNS indicates that D-H and LNS are comparable in terms of solution
quality. However, D-H is superior in terms of computational run time.

6.2

Package Delivery Orders Served by SPVs

This subsection analyzes the number of PDOs served by SPVs as a function of the number of SPVs available.
According to Section 4, the PDOs are matched to the SPVs first (an initial matching), and then PDOs are
switched from SPVs to DVs (final matching). Figure 7 displays the initial and final matching numbers
against the number of SPVs available.
The blue line in Figure 7 represents the initial number of PDOs matched with SPVs. Given the algorithm's
structure, the initial matching number is the largest possible number of PDOs SPVs can serve.
Unsurprisingly, the blue dashed line shows that the number of PDOs that SPVs can serve increases with
the number of SPVs. Similarly, the orange line shows that the final number of PDOs served by SPVs
increases with the number of SPVs in the fleet. Moreover, the dashed blue line is an upper bound on the
orange line.
Even when the number of available SPVs reaches a relatively high level, SPVs do not serve all PDOs (i.e.,
the matching rate is still around 70%). If the logistics platform can keep increasing the number of SPVs,
they can likely serve all the PDOs with SPVs. However, the total number of SPVs required may be
exceedingly high. Hence, in nearly all cases, the problem instance requires at least one DV to serve PDOs.

30

The orange line in Figure 7 represents the number of SPV-served PDOs at the optimal or near-optimal cost.
There is a stepwise-like increase in the trend. The green line indicates an increasing stepwise trend and
represents the number of PDOs served by DVs. These findings indicate that the optimal solution involves
utilizing DVs to full capacity (with a full load or a maximum travel time) while minimizing the number of
DVs in operation. When the number of SPVs increases to a level where the feasible SPVs can serve an
additional truckload of PDOs, the number of DVs required to PDOs decreases by one, and the total cost
decreases.

Figure 7: PDOs served by SPVs and DVs

6.3

SPV Usage Analysis

This section analyzes the SPV (route) usage from the supply perspective. Consider an SPV that travels
directly from its origin to the depot on the shortest path and then travels from the depot to its destination on
the shortest depot-to-destination path while delivering at least one PDO. Since the SPV does not detour
from the depot to its destination, we call this a minimum depot-to-destination detour route.
Figure 8 displays a histogram of the depot-to-destination detour distances for SPVs assigned to serve PDOs.
The histogram values come from computational experiments in Figure 7, where the number of SPVs ranges
from 100 to 1200. In Figure 8, on the x-axis, “0” indicates a minimum depot-to-destination detour route,
and the other integer numbers are the travel time differences between the used route and the minimum
depot-to-destination detour route.
The average total depot-to-destination detour distance for SPVs with delivery tasks is 0.3 miles. The leftmost bar in the histogram shows that 30% of SPVs use the minimum depot-to-destination detour route.
Moreover, 65% of the SPVs traverse a route from the depot with no more than 2 minutes of detour. From
the PDO perspective, SPVs deliver 57% of PDOs on a minimum depot-to-destination detour route. Almost
90% of the SPVs use a route with a depot-to-destination detour of less than 7 minutes.
Unsurprisingly, the histogram of used SPV routes looks similar to a negative exponential distribution
because the objective function favors SPV routes with shorter detours. However, the distribution is nonmonotonic concerning depot-to-destination detour time. After decreasing steadily from 10 to 14 minutes,
the frequency of orders steadily increases from 15 to 18 minutes of depot-to-destination detour time. One
31

possible reason for this phenomenon is that longer detour routes serve multiple PDOs or PDOs in the
region's periphery that do not fit neatly into DV routes. As such, the phenomenon may be due to the structure
of the particular service region.

Figure 8: Histogram of depot-to-destination detour distance for PDOs served by SPV routes
The implications of the results in Figure 8 are two-fold. First, from a service design perspective, increasing
the maximum willingness to detour is unlikely to increase the number of PDOs served by SPVs. Second,
algorithmically, the budget in the budgeted k-shortest path algorithm can be small and not significantly
impact the solution quality. Reducing the k-shortest path budget can significantly reduce computational
complexity. Of course, the results in Figure 8 depend on the network structure and spatial distribution of
PDOs and SPV trips.

6.4

Total Delivery Cost

Total delivery cost is the most critical metric as it is the objective function for the original problem
formulation. Figure 9 displays SPV, truck, and total delivery costs as a function of the number of SPVs
available. Figure 10 displays the per-PDO costs for SPVs, DVs, and all vehicles.
Figure 9 and Figure 10 illustrate that the total delivery cost (and, by definition, average cost) decreases as
the number of available SPVs increases. This finding is unsurprising given that more SPVs represent a
larger feasible region or more options for SPVs to serve PDOs. Consistent with the results in Figure 7, the
total delivery cost in Figure 9 reduces in steps as the number of SPVs increases. This result, again, stems
from reducing the number of DVs necessary to deliver the PDOs and the quality of the SPV routes.
The blue SPV cost line in Figure 9 increases with more SPVs, while the DV (orange line) and total cost
(green line) decrease with the number of available SPVs. SPV costs increase with the number of SPVs due
to the increase in PDOs served by SPV, while DV costs decrease due to the decrease in the number of DVs
needed to serve PDOs. The results in Figure 9 indicate that the primary savings from CSD mainly stem
from reducing the fixed costs of DVs.

32

Figure 9: Total cost and cost by vehicle type

Figure 10: Average cost per PDO
Table 5 shows that the total cost slowly decreases when available SPVs increase from 400 to 700. The
decrease stems from more SPVs allowing better matching (i.e., shorter detour distances) between SPVs and
PDOs. However, compared to the decreases between 200-300 and 700-800 when the DV fleet size
decreases by one in both cases, the decrease in cost between 400-700 is relatively small.
Table 5 shows that CSD significantly reduces cost compared to an all-DV fleet. The cost savings range
from 10% to 22% as the number of SPVs available increases.
Besides the total cost, the average cost of delivering a PDO decreases as the number of available SPVs
increases. Both Figure 10 and Table 5 demonstrate the trend. It is worth noting that while the overall average
delivery cost decreases with available SPVs, the average DV delivery cost increases slightly, and the
average SPV delivery cost decreases. However, because the average SPV delivery cost is always lower
than the average DV delivery cost, moving more PDOs with SPVs decreases the overall average delivery
cost.
33

Table 5: Total and Average Delivery Cost under Different Numbers of Available SPVs
PDOs served by
SPV
Number

SPV

DV

Cost (S)
SPV

DV

Total

AVG cost per PDO ($)
% Saving
w.r.t VRP

by SV

by DV

overall

0

0

200

0

609

609.00

-

-

3.05

3.05

100

10

190

16.68

576.6

593.28

2.58%

1.67

3.03

2.97

200

51

149

82.55

468

550.55

9.60%

1.62

3.14

2.75

300

49

151

81.185

466.88

548.07

10.01%

1.66

3.09

2.74

400

56

144

92.313

452.25

544.56

10.58%

1.65

3.14

2.72

500

60

140

91.511

450

541.51

11.08%

1.53

3.21

2.71

600

53

147

82.532

450.75

533.28

12.43%

1.56

3.07

2.67

700

61

139

93.028

437

530.03

12.97%

1.53

3.14

2.65

800

112

88

178.607

320.43

499.04

18.06%

1.59

3.64

2.50

900

121

79

197.028

301.6

498.63

18.12%

1.63

3.82

2.49

1000

106

94

166.504

328.81

495.31

18.67%

1.57

3.50

2.48

1100

116

84

183.092

300.6

483.69

20.58%

1.58

3.58

2.42

1200

123

77

188.019

288.4

476.42

21.77%

1.53

3.75

2.38

6.5

Total Delivery Vehicle Mileage

This section analyzes total vehicle miles traveled (VMT), a proxy for congestion, energy consumption, and
environmental impact. Figure 11 and Table 6 present the total VMT resulting from delivery activities for
SPVs, DVs, and all vehicles.
The results indicate that total VMT tends to increase with the number of SPVs, although non-monotonically.
This finding is unsurprising given that DV routes are more VMT-efficient than most SPV routes, and as the
number of available SPVs increases, the number of PDOs assigned to SPVs increases.
Given that VMT increases with the number of SPVs, the question is whether the CSD system increases
congestion and worsens the environmental impacts of PDO delivery compared to DC-only delivery. In the
case of congestion, the answer is almost certainly “yes.” To analyze the impact of the CSD system from an
environmental perspective, we used 𝐶𝑂2 emissions to compare DV-only and a CSD system (with different
SPV numbers). Figure 12 in Section 6.6 displays the results.
Also worth mentioning is that the VMT estimate for each SPV in Figure 11 includes SPV travel from the
SPV driver’s origin to the depot. If the logistics company only considers SPVs from people already
shopping at the store (at or near the depot), which is the case in most previous studies (Archetti et al., 2016;
Arslan et al., 2019; Dayarian and Savelsbergh, 2020), then total VMT is likely to decrease with the number
of SPVs.

34

Figure 11: VMT from PDO delivery
Table 6: Total and Average VMT as a Function of Available SPVs
PDOs served by
AVG VMT per PDO (miles)
VMT (miles) Varying Numbers
SPV
Number

SPV

DV

SPV

DV

Total

0

0

200

0

117.375

117.38

100

10

190

15.4

110.6

126.00

200

51

149

42.3

95.7

300

49

151

43.5

400

56

144

46.8

500

60

140

42.1

600

53

147

700

61

800

112

900

% Saving
w.r.t VRP

by SV

by DV

overall

-

0.59

0.59

-7.35%

1.54

0.58

0.63

138.00

-17.57%

0.83

0.64

0.69

92.6

136.10

-15.95%

0.89

0.61

0.68

84.75

131.55

-12.08%

0.84

0.59

0.66

82.875

124.98

-6.47%

0.70

0.59

0.62

41.6

83.24

124.84

-6.36%

0.78

0.57

0.62

139

47.2

76.4

123.60

-5.30%

0.77

0.55

0.62

88

88.6

62.7

151.30

-28.90%

0.79

0.71

0.76

121

79

98.4

58.4

156.80

-33.59%

0.81

0.74

0.78

1000

106

94

85.4

60.28

145.68

-24.12%

0.81

0.64

0.73

1100

116

84

93.1

57.64

150.74

-28.43%

0.80

0.69

0.75

1200

123

77

97.2

53.125

150.33

-28.07%

0.79

0.69

0.75

6.6

Impacts of Shared Vehicle Willingness-to-Detour

This section aims to assess the impact of SPV willingness to detour. In prior sections, the baseline value
for maximum willingness to detour is 30 minutes for SPVs. This section considers cases where the
maximum willingness-to-detour parameter values are 20 and 25 minutes.
Figure 12 shows the impact of the maximum willingness-to-detour time on the total delivery cost. The
results are consistent with expectations; the total delivery cost decreases as the maximum willingness to
detour increases. The impact is significant under certain conditions regarding the number of available SPVs.
At 500 available SPVs, the total delivery cost is $557 for the 20-minute maximum detour case, whereas the
35

total delivery costs are around $539 for the other two cases. Looking at a value of $500 on the y-axis in the
top figure, the 30-minute case requires only 300 available SPVs to achieve a total cost of around $550,
while the 20-minute case needs at least 700 available SPVs. On the other hand, the differences between 25minute and 30-minute cases are insignificant. Combining the finding from Section 6.3 that most SPV
drivers only incur short detours with this finding, we can conclude that from a service perspective, 25
minutes is a sufficient willingness-to-detour value for the logistics provider in this service region.

Figure 12: Impact of Willingness to Detour on Costs. The top figure compares 30- vs. 20-min
maximum detour. The bottom figure compares 30- vs 25-min maximum detour.
Figure 13 displays the relationship between the number of PDOs that SPVs can serve (y-axis) and the total
number of available SPVs (x-axis) under three different maximum willingness to detour values (i.e., the
different colored lines). Figure 13 shows that with the same number of SPVs, the 30-minute detour can
serve 4 to 6 times more PDOs than the 20-minute case. The results indicate that, at least for the Irvine

36

network and the spatial demand in the scenarios in this study, there is a strong business case for
incentivizing drivers to accept a 25-minute detour rather than a 20-minute detour.

Figure 13: Maximum PDOs that SPVs can serve
A related parameter of interest is the percentage of SPVs that can deliver at least one PDO without violating
any time-window constraints, i.e., (𝑛𝑜. 𝑓𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑏𝑙𝑒 𝑆𝑃𝑉𝑠/𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑆𝑃𝑉 𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑏𝑒𝑟)% , as a function of the
maximum willingness to detour. According to computational results for the Irvine case study with a 20minute willingness to detour, only 2 ~3% of SPVs can feasibly serve a PDO. While with a 25-minute detour,
the percentage increases to 18%. For the 30-min, the feasible SPV percentage is 40%. This result
substantiates the finding that willingness to detour significantly impacts the potential of the CSD service.
Serving a substantial number of PDOs becomes difficult without at least a 25-minute willingness to detour
for SPVs.
The results in Section 6.5 show that when SPVs handle more PDOs, total VMT increases. The reason is
that DV routes with over a dozen PDOs are quite efficient, whereas many SPVs serving only a couple of
PDOs each must all detour to the depot for PDO pickup. Our finding is consistent with the results of Qi et
al. (2018) and Rai et al. (2017). In this subsection, we extend our analysis from VMT to environmental
impact, and we focus on the role of SPV willingness-to-detour.
Vehicle type substantially impacts CSD emissions (Mohri et al., 2023). This section assumes that all
vehicles are gasoline-powered, all SPVs are family-size sedans or wagons, and all DVs are light-duty trucks.
We analyze CO2 emissions from vehicle exhaust. We obtain CO2 emissions rates for different vehicle types
from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics (U.S. Department of Transportation, 2023). Figure 14 to Figure
16 illustrate the total exhaust CO2 (in kilograms) under different willingness-to-detour scenarios.

37

Figure 14: CO2 emissions under a 20-min maximum detour scenario

Figure 15: CO2 emissions under a 25-min maximum detour scenario

Figure 16: CO2 Emissions under a 30-min maximum detour scenario
In all three detour scenarios, the total CO2 emissions increase with the number of SPVs available and, more
importantly, the number of PDOs served by SPVs. Across the three scenarios, the likelihood of matching
PDOs with SPVs increases as SPV willingness-to-detour increases. Therefore, longer SPV willingness-to38

detour values result in higher VMT and emissions. As such, any per-mile emissions benefit from using
family-sized sedans or wagons instead of a light-duty truck cannot compensate for the increase in total
VMT from SPVs.
Interestingly, however, the increase in emissions is not monotone. Using the 30-minute willingness to
detour scenario as an example (Figure 16) and cross-referencing Table 6, we see that the big jumps in
emissions occur when there is a significant positive jump in PDOs assigned to SPVs (and a significant
negative jump in PDOs assigned to DVs).
To mitigate emissions from SPVs, CSD companies can prioritize electric SPVs when acquiring SPV drivers
and assigning PDOs to SPVs.

6.7

Impact of Driver Rejection

In the base scenario, we assume that drivers always accept the assignment of PDOs. However, drivers may
reject the assignment or not show up. Rejection may stem from dissatisfaction with the compensation or
unwillingness to detour as much as is required. This section compares two scenarios with a random driver
rejection rate of 10% (Scenario 1) and 20% (Scenario 2).
Algorithm 3 below describes our method to analyze the impact of SPV drivers rejecting PDOs, where 𝛼 is
the rejection probability for a PDO. After an SPV driver initially rejects a PDO, we assume the logistics
company has one chance to reassign the rejected PDOs to previously unassigned SPVs. If this “second
chance SPV match” is unsuccessful or the second SPV rejects a PDO, the unassigned PDOs must be
delivered by DVs.
Assignment with driver rejection
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Step 1:
Obtain an initial solution with the D-H algorithm
Step 2:
For 𝑠 in 𝑆𝑃𝑉 set:
if 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑜𝑚(0, 1) ≥ 1 − 𝛼
PDO 𝑝 rejected. Append 𝑝 to 𝑃𝐷𝑂𝑟𝑒𝑗
Step 3:
Rematch 𝑃𝐷𝑂𝑟𝑒𝑗 with unassigned 𝑆𝑃𝑉𝑠, with constraints that rule out previous rejections.
Repeat Step 2 for the new matchings and 𝑃𝐷𝑂𝑟𝑒𝑗
Step 4:
Run insertion algorithm to assign 𝑃𝐷𝑂𝑟𝑒𝑗 to 𝐷𝑉𝑠.

Figure 17 displays the total cost of each scenario as a bar plot. As expected, as the rejection percentage
increases, the total cost increases. Interestingly, total cost appears to increase by 0.5-2.0% when going from
0% rejection to 20% rejection. Hence, the CSD system is naturally robust to drivers rejecting PDOs.
The line graphs in Figure 17 display the percentage differences for Scenario 1 and 2 vs. the base scenario.
As the number of available SPVs increases, both “relative cost difference” lines have a sharp jump and then
slowly decrease. In the 100 SPV case, the total cost differences are quite small because, with a low level of
SPV participants, the number of PDOs assigned to SPVs is low. Therefore, the impact of SPV driver
rejection is limited. In the 200-to-400-SPV case, the impact of rejection is the largest because the system
assigns a lot of PDOs to SPVs, but when these PDOs are rejected, there are very few unassigned SPVs that
39

can serve the rejected PDOs. In the case of 500-1200 SPVs, both lines show a decreasing trend because as
the number of SPVs increases, as SPV drivers reject PDOs, other SPVs can relatively easily handle the
PDOs.

Figure 17: Cost comparison between different driver rejection rates

6.8

Managerial Insights

Section 6 includes a realistic city-scale numerical case study of a CSD system. Although the results are
generated based on the City of Irvine's geographical, network, and spatial demand patterns, we believe
several important findings provide transferable managerial insights.
First, the results indicate that logistics companies that employ CSD service can reduce the number of DVs
they purchase and operate on a given day. By reducing the number of operating DVs, logistics companies
can reduce labor costs and the fixed per-vehicle costs of storage, maintenance, and insurance. However,
our results indicate that serving all PDOs using only SPVs is difficult; hence, it is hard to completely
eliminate DV service.
Second, regarding externalities, our results indicate that the CSD system is likely to increase VMT and
emissions relative to a DV-only system. However, when calculating emissions, we assume SPVs are sedans
and DVs are light-duty tracks; we also assume both vehicle types are gas-powered. Our result contrasts
with prior research on CSD systems where CD drivers start their trips from the store/depot. To mitigate
emissions from SPVs, CSD companies can prioritize electric SPVs when acquiring SPV drivers and
assigning PDOs to SPVs.
Third, the results also indicate that the maximum willingness-to-detour of SPV drivers has a large and
highly nonlinear relationship with the cost-effectiveness of the CSD system. In our case study, there is a
significant gap in performance between the 20- and 25-minute parameter values and a small gap between
the 25- and 30-minute parameter values. Hence, logistics providers should thoroughly analyze the
relationship between maximum willingness-to-detour and CSD costs for their service region.

40

7

Conclusion

7.1

Summary

This study presents new mathematical models and algorithms to address large-scale CSD problem instances.
Following the literature on CD, the paper first models the CSD problem as an MFOCVRPTW. This
formulation captures the general features of CSD. However, finding an optimal solution based on this
formulation is computationally expensive. To improve efficiency, we reformulate the problem as a set
partitioning problem. The alternative set partitioning formulation inspires a new solution approach called
the D-H algorithm.
The novel D-H algorithm decomposes the problem by vehicle type: SPV and DV. The D-H algorithm
matches PDOs to each vehicle type separately and routes each vehicle type separately in the initial stage to
obtain an initial solution. After that, the algorithm switches PDOs between SPVs and DVs to improve
solution quality. The switching process is an SA-inspired procedure. We compare the D-H with a
commercial solver, Gurobi, for solving the CSD problem. The D-H can obtain solutions with a 1.2 %
optimality gap for small-scale cases, and the D-H is much faster and more scalable than the commercial
solver.
We apply the models and algorithms to the City of Irvine. The paper analyzes major factors that impact the
efficiency of a CSD. The analysis includes metrics such as total cost, total VMT, and the number of PDOs
delivered by SPVs. Moreover, the study presents a sensitivity analysis of various performance metrics with
respect to changes in the maximum willingness to detour.
Overall, the paper significantly advances the state-of-the-art through novel, computationally efficient, and
operationally effective mathematical models and associated heuristic solution algorithms. Moreover, the
paper contributes to logistics and transportation practice by addressing real-world problem instances
(through numerical case studies) and providing valuable managerial insights.

7.2

Limitation and Future Research

There are several limitations associated with our research methodology. First, we assume information about
SPV drivers and PDOs is deterministic. In contrast, the real-world problem is inherently stochastic and
needs to be solved online/dynamically. Future research should explicitly model uncertainty about PDOs
and SPV drivers. Moreover, travel times between PDO locations are inherently uncertain. Future research
can also consider stochastic travel times and account for them when generating SPV routes.
Second, while we analyze the impact of SPV driver rejection on system performance, we use a simple
stochastic model with a universal rejection probability for all drivers. Future research should collect data
and then estimate and calibrate a driver rejection model, wherein drivers reject assigned PDOs based on the
attributes of the offer (e.g., compensation, detour distance, detour time, time-of-day). Moreover, since SPV
driver rejection is likely to occur dynamically during the day, a stochastic-dynamic model is preferable for
handling SPV driver rejections.
The research presented in this study also opens several additional lines of research. First, while this study
assumes the central logistics operator has complete information about the origin and destination of each
SPV (information that significantly impacts the fee paid to SPVs), obtaining this information in the real
world may not be straightforward. Hence, developing truth-telling mechanisms/incentives to obtain this
information from SPV drivers may be necessary.
41

To further improve the computational speed and quality of the algorithm, researchers can design additional
algorithms to generate “potentially good” SPV routes or to eliminate unpromising routes. Similarly,
researchers might improve the matching procedure through a learning process that can identify potentially
good matches. Learning algorithms might also generate promising candidate routes for SPVs. Via learning
promising candidate routes, it may be possible to reduce computational time.
Moreover, a future CD system may include connected automated vehicles owned by individuals but rented
out to logistics providers during certain portions of the day. Therefore, further research could combine the
usage of shared-use connected automated vehicles for people trips and PDO delivery to improve outcomes,
such as reducing carbon emissions and improving vehicle utilization. Fehn et al. (2023) present a promising
approach for integrating packages and people in a logistics service, where they use heuristic insertion
algorithms in an agent-based simulation.

Acknowledgments
The authors declare that we have no conflicts of interest.
We want to thank our colleague Dr. Navjyoth Sarma Jayashankar Shobha for discussing the problem and
providing suggestions. We also would like to thank the editors and four anonymous reviewers for dedicating
time and effort to reviewing our paper and providing insightful comments and valuable suggestions.

42

References
Ahamed, T., Zou, B., Farazi, N. P., & Tulabandhula, T. (2021). Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Crowdsourced Urban Delivery. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 152, 227–257.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2021.08.015
Akeb, H., Moncef, B., & Durand, B. (2018). Building a collaborative solution in dense urban city settings
to enhance parcel delivery: An effective crowd model in Paris. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review, 119, 223–233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2018.04.007
Alnaggar, A., Gzara, F., & Bookbinder, J. H. (2021). Crowdsourced delivery: A review of platforms and
academic literature. Omega, 98, 102139–102151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2019.102139
Amazon. (2021). Amazon Logistics. https://logistics.amazon.com/
Archetti, C., Guerriero, F., & Macrina, G. (2021). The online vehicle routing problem with occasional
drivers. Computers and Operations Research, 127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2020.105144
Archetti, C., Savelsbergh, M., & Speranza, M. G. (2016). The Vehicle Routing Problem with Occasional
Drivers. European Journal of Operational Research, 254(2), 472–480.
Arslan, A. M., Agatz, N., Kroon, L., & Zuidwijk, R. (2019). Crowdsourced delivery—a dynamic pickup
and delivery problem with ad hoc drivers. Transportation Science, 53(1), 222–235.
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2017.0803
Ausseil, R., Pazour, J. A., & Ulmer, M. W. (2022). Supplier Menus for Dynamic Matching in Peer-to-Peer
Transportation
Platforms.
Transportation
Science,
56(5),
1304–1326.
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2022.1133
Baldacci, R., Battarra, M., & Vigo, D. (2008). Routing a Heterogeneous Fleet of Vehicles. In The Vehicle
Routing Problem: Latest Advances and New Challenges (pp. 3–27). Springer US.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77778-8_1
Baldacci, R., Christofides, N., & Mingozzi, A. (2008). An exact algorithm for the vehicle routing problem
based on the set partitioning formulation with additional cuts. Mathematical Programming, 115(2),
351–385. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10107-007-0178-5
Baldacci, R., Mingozzi, A., & Roberti, R. (2012). Recent exact algorithms for solving the vehicle routing
problem under capacity and time window constraints. European Journal of Operational Research,
218(1), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2011.07.037
Barbosa, M., Pedroso, J. P., & Viana, A. (2023). A data-driven compensation scheme for last-mile delivery
with crowdsourcing. Computers and Operations Research, 150, 106059–106070.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2022.106059
Behrend, M., & Meisel, F. (2018). The integration of item-sharing and crowdshipping: Can collaborative
consumption be pushed by delivering through the crowd? Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological, 111, 227–243. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2018.02.017
Behrend, M., Meisel, F., Fagerholt, K., & Andersson, H. (2019). An exact solution method for the
capacitated item-sharing and crowdshipping problem. European Journal of Operational Research,
279(2), 589–604. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2019.05.026
43

Behrendt, A., Savelsbergh, M., & Wang, H. (2023). A Prescriptive Machine Learning Method for Courier
Scheduling on Crowdsourced Delivery Platforms. Transportation Science, 57(4), 889–907.
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2022.1152
Boysen, N., Emde, S., & Schwerdfeger, S. (2022). Crowdshipping by employees of distribution centers:
Optimization approaches for matching supply and demand. European Journal of Operational
Research, 296(2), 539–556. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2021.04.002
Campbell, A. M., & Savelsbergh, M. (2004). Efficient Insertion Heuristics for Vehicle Routing and
Scheduling
Problems.
Transportation
Science,
38(3),
369–378.
https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1030.0046
Castillo, V. E., Mollenkopf, D. A., Bell, J. E., & Esper, T. L. (2022). Designing technology for on-demand
delivery: The effect of customer tipping on crowdsourced driver behavior and last mile performance.
Journal of Operations Management, 68(5), 424–453. https://doi.org/10.1002/joom.1187
Christofides, N., & Eilon, S. (1969). An Algorithm for the Vehicle-dispatching Problem. Journal of the
Operational Research Society, 20(3), 309–318. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.1969.75
Clarke, G., & Wright, J. W. (1964). Scheduling of Vehicles from a Central Depot to a Number of Delivery
Points. Operations Research, 12(4), 568–581. https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.12.4.568
Cordeau, J. F., & Laporte, G. (2003). A tabu search heuristic for the static multi-vehicle dial-a-ride problem.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 37(6), 579–594. https://doi.org/10.1016/S01912615(02)00045-0
Dahle, L., Andersson, H., Christiansen, M., & Speranza, M. G. (2019). The pickup and delivery problem
with time windows and occasional drivers. Computers and Operations Research, 109, 122–133.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2019.04.023
Dai, H., & Liu, P. (2020). Workforce planning for O2O delivery systems with crowdsourced drivers. Annals
of Operations Research, 291(1–2), 219–245. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-019-03135-z
Dayarian, I., & Savelsbergh, M. (2020). Crowdshipping and Same-day Delivery : Employing In-store
Customers to Deliver Online Orders. Production and Operations Management, 29(9), 2153–2174.
https://doi.org/10.1111/poms.13219
Desrosiers, M., Desrosiers, J., & Marius, S. (1992). A New Optimization Algorithm for the Vehicle Routing
Problem
with
Time
Windows.
Operations
Research,
40(2),
342–354.
http://www.jstor.com/stable/171457
Devari, A., Nikolaev, A. G., & He, Q. (2017). Crowdsourcing the last mile delivery of online orders by
exploiting the social networks of retail store customers. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics
and Transportation Review, 105, 105–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2017.06.011
Ermagun, A., Shamshiripour, A., & Stathopoulos, A. (2020). Performance analysis of crowd-shipping in
urban and suburban areas. Transportation, 47(4), 1955–1985. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-01910033-7
Ermagun, A., & Stathopoulos, A. (2018). To bid or not to bid: An empirical study of the supply determinants
of crowd-shipping. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 116, 468–483.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2018.06.019
44

Fatehi, S., & Wagner, M. R. (2022). Crowdsourcing Last-Mile Deliveries. Manufacturing and Service
Operations Management, 24(2), 791–809. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2021.0973
Fehn, F., Engelhardt, R., Dandl, F., Bogenberger, K., & Busch, F. (2023). Integrating parcel deliveries into
a ride-pooling service—An agent-based simulation study. Transportation Research Part A: Policy
and Practice, 169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2022.103580
Feng, L., Zhou, L., Gupta, A., Zhong, J., Zhu, Z., Tan, K. C., & Qin, K. (2021). Solving Generalized Vehicle
Routing Problem with Occasional Drivers via Evolutionary Multitasking. IEEE Transactions on
Cybernetics, 51(6), 3171–3184. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCYB.2019.2955599
Gdowska, K., Viana, A., & Pedroso, J. P. (2018). Stochastic last-mile delivery with crowdshipping.
Transportation Research Procedia, 30, 90–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2018.09.011
Gendreau, M., & Potvin, J. Y. (2005). Tabu Search. In Search Methodologies: Introductory Tutorials in
Optimization and Decision Support Techniques (pp. 165–186). Springer US.
https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-28356-0_6
Ghaderi, H., Tsai, P. W., Zhang, L., & Moayedikia, A. (2022). An integrated crowdshipping framework for
green last mile delivery. Sustainable Cities and Society, 78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2021.103552
Ghaderi, H., Zhang, L., Tsai, P. W., & Woo, J. (2022). Crowdsourced last-mile delivery with parcel lockers.
International Journal of Production Economics, 251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2022.108549
Golden, B. L., Raghavan, S., & Wasil, E. A. (Eds. ). (2008). The vehicle routing problem: Latest advances
and new challenges. In Operations Research/ Computer Science Interfaces Series (Vol. 43). Springer
Science & Business Media. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-77778-8
Hansen, P., Mladenović, N., & Perez-Britos, D. (2001). Variable neighborhood decomposition search.
Journal of Heuristics, 7(4), 335–350. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1011336210885
indeed.com.
(2023,
August).
Delivery
driver
https://www.indeed.com/career/delivery-driver/salaries

salary

in

United

States.

Internal Revenue Service. (2021, September 25). IRS issues standard mileage rates for 2021.
https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/irs-issues-standard-mileage-rates-for-2021
Irnich, S., Toth, P., & Vigo, D. (2014). Chapter 1: The Family of Vehicle Routing Problems. In Vehicle
Routing: Problems, Methods, and Applications (Second Edition, pp. 1–33). Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics. https://doi.org/10.1137/1.9781611973594.ch1
Kafle, N., Zou, B., & Lin, J. (2017). Design and modeling of a crowdsource-enabled system for urban
parcel relay and delivery. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 99, 62–82.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2016.12.022
Laporte, G. (1992). The traveling salesman problem: An overview of exact and approximate algorithms.
European Journal of Operational Research, 59(2), 231–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/03772217(92)90138-Y
Laporte, G., Gendreau, M., Potvin, J. Y., & Semet, F. (2000). Classical and modern heuristics for the vehicle
routing problem. International Transactions in Operational Research, 7(4–5), 285–300.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-3995.2000.tb00200.x
45

Laporte, G., Nobert, Y., & Desrochers, M. (1985). Optimal Routing under Capacity and Distance
Restrictions. Operations Research, 33(5), 1050–1073.
Le, T. V., Ukkusuri, S. V., Xue, J., & Van Woensel, T. (2021). Designing pricing and compensation
schemes by integrating matching and routing models for crowd-shipping systems. Transportation
Research
Part
E:
Logistics
and
Transportation
Review,
149.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2020.102209
Lee, Y. H., Kim, J. I., Kang, K. H., & Kim, K. H. (2008). A heuristic for vehicle fleet mix problem using
tabu search and set partitioning. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 59(6), 833–841.
https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.jors.2602421
Lei, Y. (Murray), Jasin, S., Wang, J., Deng, H., & Putrevu, J. (2020). Dynamic Workforce Acquisition for
Crowdsourced
Last-Mile
Delivery
Platforms.
SSRN
Electronic
Journal.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3532844
Li, F., Golden, B., & Wasil, E. (2007). The open vehicle routing problem: Algorithms, large-scale test
problems, and computational results. Computers and Operations Research, 34(10), 2918–2930.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2005.11.018
Little, J. D. C., Murty, K. G., Sweeney, D. W., & Karel, C. (1963). An Algorithm for the Traveling
Salesman Problem. Operations Research, 11(6), 972–989. https://www.jstor.org/stable/167836
Macrina, G., Di Puglia Pugliese, L., Guerriero, F., & Laganà, D. (2017). The Vehicle Routing Problem with
Occasional Drivers and Time Windows. In Optimization and Decision Science: Methodologies and
Applications: ODS, Sorrento, Italy, September 4-7, 2017 47 (pp. 577–587). Springer International
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67308-0_58
Macrina, G., Pugliese, L. D. P., Guerriero, F., & Laporte, G. (2020). Crowd-shipping with time windows
and
transshipment
nodes.
Computers
and
Operations
Research,
113.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2019.104806
Miller, J., Nie, Y. M., & Stathopoulos, A. (2017). Crowdsourced Urban Package Delivery Modeling
Traveler Willingness to Work as Crowdshippers. 2610, 67–75. https://doi.org/10.3141/2610-08
Mofidi, S. S., & Pazour, J. A. (2019). When is it beneficial to provide freelance suppliers with choice? A
hierarchical approach for peer-to-peer logistics platforms. Transportation Research Part B:
Methodological, 126, 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2019.05.008
Mohri, S. S., Ghaderi, H., Nassir, N., & Thompson, R. G. (2023). Crowdshipping for sustainable urban
logistics: A systematic review of the literature. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2023.103289
Mousavi, K., Bodur, M., & Roorda, M. J. (2022). Stochastic Last-Mile Delivery with Crowd-Shipping and
Mobile Depots. Transportation Science, 56(3), 612–630. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2021.1088
Nieto-Isaza, S., Fontaine, P., & Minner, S. (2022). The value of stochastic crowd resources and strategic
location of mini-depots for last-mile delivery: A Benders decomposition approach. Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological, 157, 62–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2021.12.014
Nikolaev, A. G., & Jacobson, S. H. (2010). Simulated Annealing. In Handbook of Metaheuristics (pp. 1–
39). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-1665-5_1
46

Özarık, S. S., Lurkin, V., Veelenturf, L. P., Van Woensel, T., & Laporte, G. (2023). An Adaptive Large
Neighborhood Search heuristic for last-mile deliveries under stochastic customer availability and
multiple visits. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 170, 194–220.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.2023.02.016
Özarık, S. S., Veelenturf, L. P., Woensel, T. Van, & Laporte, G. (2021). Optimizing e-commerce last-mile
vehicle routing and scheduling under uncertain customer presence. Transportation Research Part E:
Logistics and Transportation Review, 148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2021.102263
Pisinger, D., & Ropke, S. (2019). Large Neighborhood Search. In Handbook of Metaheuristics (pp. 99–
127). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91086-4_4
Prins, C. (2004). A simple and effective evolutionary algorithm for the vehicle routing problem. Computers
and Operations Research, 31(12), 1985–2002. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-0548(03)00158-8
Pugliese, L. D. P., Ferone, D., Macrina, G., Festa, P., & Guerriero, F. (2023). The crowd-shipping with
penalty cost function and uncertain travel times. Omega, 115, 102776–102800.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omega.2022.102776
Punel, A., Ermagun, A., & Stathopoulos, A. (2018). Studying determinants of crowd-shipping use. Travel
Behaviour and Society, 12, 30–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2018.03.005
Punel, A., & Stathopoulos, A. (2017). Modeling the acceptability of crowdsourced goods deliveries : Role
of context and experience effects. Transportation Research Part E, 105, 18–38.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2017.06.007
Qi, W., Li, L., Liu, S., & Shen, Z. J. M. (2018). Shared mobility for last-mile delivery: Design, operational
prescriptions, and environmental impact. Manufacturing and Service Operations Management, 20(4),
737–751. https://doi.org/10.1287/msom.2017.0683
Rai, H. B., Verlinde, S., Merckx, J., & Macharis, C. (2017). Crowd logistics: an opportunity for more
sustainable urban freight transport? European Transport Research Review, 9(3), 1–13.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12544-017-0256-6
Ropke, S., & Cordeau, J. F. (2009). Branch and cut and price for the pickup and delivery problem with time
windows. Transportation Science, 43(3), 267–286. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1090.0272
Ryan, D. M., Hjorring, C., & Glover, F. (1993). Extensions of the petal method for vehicle routeing. Journal
of the Operational Research Society, 44(3), 289–296. https://doi.org/10.1057/jors.1993.54
Savelsbergh, M. W., & Ulmer, M. W. (2022). Challenges and opportunities in crowdsourced delivery
planning and operations. 4OR, 20(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10288-021-00500-2
Silva, M., Pedroso, J. P., & Viana, A. (2023). Stochastic crowd shipping last-mile delivery with correlated
marginals and probabilistic constraints. European Journal of Operational Research, 307(1), 249–265.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2022.10.039
Simoni, M. D., & Winkenbach, M. (2023). Crowdsourced on-demand food delivery: An order batching and
assignment algorithm. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 149.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2023.104055

47

Tao, J., Dai, H., Jiang, H., & Chen, W. (2021). Dispatch optimisation in O2O on-demand service with
crowd-sourced and in-house drivers. International Journal of Production Research, 59(20), 6054–
6068. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1800120
Torres, F., Gendreau, M., & Rei, W. (2022a). Crowdshipping: An open VRP variant with stochastic
destinations.
Transportation
Research
Part
C:
Emerging
Technologies,
140.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2022.103677
Torres, F., Gendreau, M., & Rei, W. (2022b). Vehicle Routing with Stochastic Supply of Crowd Vehicles
and Time Windows. Transportation Science, 56(3), 631–653. https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.2021.1101
Ulmer, M., & Savelsbergh, M. (2020). Workforce scheduling in the era of crowdsourced delivery.
Transportation Science, 54(4), 1113–1133. https://doi.org/10.1287/TRSC.2020.0977
Ulmer, M. W. (2020). Dynamic pricing and routing for same-day delivery. Transportation Science, 54(4),
1016–1033. https://doi.org/10.1287/TRSC.2019.0958
U.S. Department of Energy. (2023, August). Alternative Fuels Data Center - Vehicle Cost Calculator.
https://afdc.energy.gov/calc/
U.S. Department of Transportation. (2023, April 30). Estimated U.S. Average Vehicle Emissions Rates per
Vehicle by Vehicle Type Using Gasoline and Diesel. National Transportation Statistics Table 4-43.
https://www.bts.gov/content/estimated-national-average-vehicle-emissions-rates-vehicle-vehicletype-using-gasoline-and
Wang, Y., Zhang, D., Liu, Q., Shen, F., & Lee, L. H. (2016). Towards enhancing the last-mile delivery: An
effective crowd-tasking model with scalable solutions. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 93, 279–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2016.06.002
Yannakakis, M. (1985). On a Class of Totally Unimodular Matrices. Mathematics of Operations Research,
10(2), 280–304.
Yen, J. Y. (1971). Finding the K Shortest Loopless Paths. Management Science, 17(11), 712–716.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2629312
Yildiz, B., & Savelsbergh, M. (2019). Service and capacity planning in crowd-sourced delivery.
Transportation
Research
Part
C:
Emerging
Technologies,
100,
177–199.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2019.01.021
Yu, V. F., Jodiawan, P., & Redi, A. A. N. P. (2022). Crowd-shipping problem with time windows,
transshipment nodes, and delivery options. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and
Transportation Review, 157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2021.102545
Zehtabian, S., Larsen, C., & Wøhlk, S. (2022). Estimation of the arrival time of deliveries by occasional
drivers in a crowd-shipping setting. European Journal of Operational Research, 303(2), 616–632.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2022.02.050

48

Appendix A
Pseudocode for the Budgeted Yen’s Algorithm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
29
29
30
31

Yen’s Algorithm with Budget Constraints
𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸), 𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒 = 𝑠, 𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 = 𝑡, 𝑏𝑢𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑡 = 𝐵
Function 𝑩𝒈𝒕𝒀𝒆𝒏𝑲𝒔𝒑(𝐺, 𝑠, 𝑡, 𝐵):
Initialization:
Find the shortest path between 𝑠 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑡, store it in list 𝐴
𝐴 = [𝐷𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑎(𝐺, 𝑠, 𝑡)], 𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 = [𝑆𝐻𝑃 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡]
𝐼𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒 𝑎 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑝/𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑠𝑜𝑛
𝐶 = ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑝. 𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒()
𝐵𝑢𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑡𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑔 = 𝐓𝐑𝐔𝐄
While 𝐵𝑢𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑡𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑔 𝑖𝑠 𝐓𝐑𝐔𝐄:
For 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑖𝑛 𝐴:
For 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ, 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑑 𝑠𝑝𝑢𝑟 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠:
𝑠𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒 = 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒
𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ = 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ[: 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒]
𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒 = [ ]
For 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑖𝑛 𝐴:
If 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ = 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ[: 𝑠𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒]
𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘𝑠 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 𝑏𝑦 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ
𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑑 𝑆𝐻𝑃 𝑏𝑒𝑡𝑤𝑒𝑒𝑛 𝑠𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑁𝑜𝑑𝑒 𝑡𝑜 𝑡, 𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑎𝑠 𝑠𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ
If 𝑛𝑜 𝑙𝑜𝑜𝑝 𝑖𝑛 (𝑠𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ, 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ):
𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑖𝑛𝑒 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑠𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ
𝐶𝑎𝑙𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 = 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑡𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 + 𝑠𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑃𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡
𝑆𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑒 (𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ, 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡) 𝑖𝑛 𝑡ℎ𝑒 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑝 𝐶
For 𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 𝑖𝑛 𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑅𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑:
𝐴𝑑𝑑 𝑏𝑎𝑐𝑘 𝑡𝑜 𝑟𝑒𝑚𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑 𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑠 𝑡𝑜 𝐺
If 𝑡ℎ𝑒 ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑝 𝐶 𝑖𝑠 𝑛𝑜𝑡 𝑒𝑚𝑝𝑡𝑦:
𝐺𝑒𝑡 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑓𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ 𝑖𝑛 𝐶 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑖𝑡𝑠 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡, 𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑎𝑠 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐴𝑑𝑑 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐴𝑑𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡
If 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐴𝑑𝑑 𝑛𝑜 𝑖𝑛 𝐴, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐴𝑑𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 ≤ 𝐵𝑢𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑡:
𝐴𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑 (𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐴𝑑𝑑) 𝑡𝑜 𝐴 𝑙𝑖𝑠𝑡, a𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑛𝑑(𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐴𝑑𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡)𝑡𝑜 𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡
Elif 𝑝𝑎𝑡ℎ𝐴𝑑𝑑𝐶𝑜𝑠𝑡 > 𝐵:
𝐹𝑙𝑖𝑝 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑏𝑢𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑡 𝑓𝑙𝑎𝑔, 𝐵𝑢𝑑𝑔𝑒𝑡𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑔 = 𝐅𝐀𝐋𝐒𝐄
Return 𝐴, 𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠𝑡

49

Appendix B
Pseudocode for the m-VRP Insertion Algorithm
Insertion Algorithm for m-VRP
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Initialization:
𝑃𝑑𝑣 = 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑢𝑛𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑑 𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠
𝑅 = 𝑡ℎ𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝑜𝑓 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑠; Including an empty route
While 𝑃𝑑𝑣 ≠ ∅:
Minimum insertion cost 𝑐 ∗ = +∞
Node to insert 𝑢∗ = 𝑁𝑜𝑛𝑒
Link to insert (𝑖, 𝑗)∗ = 𝑁𝑜𝑛𝑒
Route to insert 𝑟 ∗ = 𝑁𝑜𝑛𝑒
For all unserved nodes 𝑢 ∈ 𝑃𝑑𝑣 :
For all vehicle routes 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅:
If 𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑡𝑦[𝑝] + 𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑[𝑟] ≤ 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑞𝑘 :
For 𝑎𝑙𝑙 𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑘 (𝑖, 𝑗) ∈ 𝑟, 𝑖, 𝑗 𝑎𝑟𝑒 𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠:
Do 𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑠 = 𝑐𝑖,𝑢 + 𝑐𝑢,𝑗 − 𝑐𝑖,𝑗
If 𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑠 < 𝑐 ∗ , time window fits, and Route duration ≤ Max duration:
𝑢∗ = 𝑢; 𝑐 ∗ = 𝑐;
(𝑖, 𝑗)∗ = (𝑖, 𝑗); 𝑟 ∗ = 𝑟;
End If
End For
End If
End For
End For
Insert 𝑢∗ 𝑡𝑜 (𝑖, 𝑗)∗ 𝑖𝑛 𝑟 ∗ , update 𝑟 ∗ .
𝑃𝑑𝑣 ∖ 𝑢∗
End While
Return r𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒 𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝑅

50

Appendix C
Pseudocode for a Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) Algorithm
Large Neighborhood Search (LNS)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Initialization:
Input feasible solution 𝒙𝒊𝒏𝒊𝒕 , 𝚯𝒊𝒏𝒊𝒕
𝒙𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕 = 𝒙𝒊𝒏𝒊𝒕 , 𝚯𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕 = 𝚯𝒊𝒏𝒊𝒕
While iteration(𝑡) < Taget (220)
𝑡+= 1
Destruction:
Randomly choose 30% of the matching for rematching
Reconstruction:
Follow Appendix A for the SPV and PDO assignment
Follow Appendix B Insertion Algorithm for DV and PDO Assignment
Obtain new solution 𝒙𝒕 , 𝚯𝒕
If 𝚯𝒕 < 𝚯𝐛𝐞𝐬𝐭 :
𝒙𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕 = 𝒙𝒕 , 𝚯𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕 = 𝚯𝒕
Elif 𝚯𝒕 ≥ 𝚯𝐛𝐞𝐬𝐭 :
Θ𝑡 −Θ𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡

15

𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 = exp (−

16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

If 𝑇𝑒𝑠𝑡 > 𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑑(0, 1):
𝒙𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕 = 𝒙𝒕 , 𝚯𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕 = 𝚯𝒕
Else:
Reject
End If
End If
End While
Return 𝒙𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕 , 𝚯𝒃𝒆𝒔𝒕

𝑇𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡

)

51

